     CONTENTS

1    Adua
2    Talking-To
3    Zoppe
4    Adua
5    Talking-To
6    Zoppe
7    Adua
8    Talking-To
9    Zoppe
10   Adua
11   Talking-To
12   Zoppe
13   Adua
14   Talking-To
15   Zoppe
16   Adua
17   Talking-To
18   Zoppe
   19      Adua
   20      Talking-To
   21      Zoppe
   22      Adua
   23      Talking-To
   24      Zoppe
   25      Adua
   26      Talking-To
   27      Zoppe
   28      Adua
   29      Talking-To
   30      Zoppe


Epilogue:
Piazza dei Cinquecento
Historical Note
Glossary
Acknowledgements
                                      1
                                 ADUA

I am Adua, daughter of Zoppe. Today I found the deed to Labo Dhegax, our
house in Magalo, in southern Somalia. It was tucked away in an old pewter
case I had in storage; it’d been there for ages and I’d never noticed.
    Now I have my papers. Now if I want, I can go back to Somalia too.
    I have a house, and most important, an official document stating in
writing that it belonged to my father, Mohamed Ali Zoppe. Therefore, it’s
mine.
    Finally I’ll be able to clear out the squatters who’ve occupied it since
those sad years of war.
    Labo Dhegax means “two stones.” A strange name for a house, perhaps
not such an auspicious one. But I wouldn’t dream of changing it now. It
wouldn’t make sense.
    It started out with that name and with that name it is destined to exist.
    Legend has it that my father, Mohamed Ali Zoppe, once said: “These
are the two stones, the labo dhegax, upon which I will build my future.”
    Who knows whether he really said that? Sounds like something out of
the Bible.
    Fact is, by now the legend has taken root in our hearts, and I must say,
regardless of its truth the family is still attached to it.
    Every night before I fall asleep, I wonder if I too, like my father, will be
able to build what future I have left in our land.
    I asked Lul if she’d check on Labo Dhegax since she was leaving Rome
soon.
     I said: “Please, I’m counting on you, abaayo, to find out every little
detail about my old house.”
     It was a windy day. Our scarves fluttered over the buildings of the
capital.
     I hugged her and said: “Don’t forget Labo Dhegax. Don’t forget me,
sister.” She didn’t make any promises.
     Lul was the first of my friends to go back. She called after a week in
Mogadishu and said, “The air smells like onions.” She didn’t say much else.
I asked her question after question. I wanted to know if our country had
really changed that much and if those of us who’d been away for over thirty
years could reconnect with the new, the brandnew, peacetime Somalia.
     “Is our dream going to last?” I asked her. “Is it possible to make a home
there?” I pressed.
     But Lul didn’t answer. On the phone she used words like “business,”
“money.” She kept telling me that the time to make deals was today, not
tomorrow. Now was the time to make money. Now was the time to cash in.
     “That’s peace, honey,” she sneered. “If you care about your two stones,
come.” Peace. Before August, I’d thought peace was a beautiful word.
     No one ever told me that it’s really an ambiguous one.
     Civil war broke out in my country in 1991. In 2013, peace is breaking
out. Hooray.
     Now it’s all about business for the Somalis. For Lul ...
     But I’m still in Rome and from here it all seems so strange. I love Rome
in the summer, especially the light in the evening when the sun is setting.
It’s hot, even the seagulls seem nicer and make you want to hug them. They
dominate the piazzas, but here you are, my little elephant, and they don’t
dare. Shoo, away from Piazza della Minerva! I feel safe when I’m around
you. Here, I’m in Magalo—at home. My father had big ears too, but he was
never good at listening, and I was never able to talk to him. It’s different
with you. That’s why I’m grateful to Bernini for having made you. A little
marble elephant holding up the smallest obelisk in the world. A toothpick.
Don’t take that the wrong way. I need you, you know.
    Lul is gone and I don’t know if I’ll ever see her again. But you remind
me of her. You’re a good listener. I need to be heard, otherwise my words
will fade away and be lost.
    “Look at that black lady talking to herself,” people say, pointing at us.
But we don’t pay them any attention. We understand each other perfectly,
you and I. After all, we’re both from the Indian Ocean. Our ocean of magic
spells and scents, of separations and reunions. You’re a nomad, like me.
    Right now Lul is breathing in our tuna-scented ocean air. Drinking
shaah cadees.
    Ordering everyone around like adoon.
    I know Lul, she’s a good person, and for that very reason is the
sneakiest sort of charmer.
    Lul is first in my thoughts. What is my friend doing in Somalia now?
What business has she gotten into?
    What if I really went and joined her? My suitcase is ready. I never
unpacked.
    It’s been ready since 1976. I should put the suitcase along with my tired
body on a plane headed for Ankara and from there direct to Mogadishu.
    But that’s just a fantasy.
    Yesterday there was this girl on the tram. She was black and had a
shaved head and thick legs. We were on the fourteen where it turns toward
Porta Maggiore. She’d been staring at me since Termini. I was irritated by
her hard gaze. I felt like turning around and saying “Stop,” like mixing my
mother tongue with Dantean Italian and creating one of those scenes that
make public transport in Rome entertaining. I wanted to be vulgar and go
overboard. I wanted a big scene, that way I’d stop thinking about Lul, about
Labo Dhegax, about the strange peace in Somalia. But the girl got wise. She
sauntered over and virtually without warning shot me her question: “You’re
Adua, right? The actress? I saw your movie.” And then after a pause, as if
she’d planned it out, she added: “You really make an impression, you know
that?”
    I was completely rattled.
  My movie? There was actually someone who still remembered that
movie?
                                    2
                        TALKING-TO

Don’t misbehave, Adua. Get your elbows off the table. And wipe your dirty
mouth. Sit up straight, for God’s sake, why are you all hunched over? Your
hands are filthy, go wash them or I’ll thrash you. Is that how you look at
Zoppe, your father, you heathen? You’re just like your mother, Asha the
Rash, that good-for-nothing. Your mother, that whore, who went and died
on me, leaving me alone with nothing but my love. How could she let
herself die? Tell me, how could she let that happen? That damn woman!
And what about you? Are you going to die on me too? You have her eyes, I
can’t stand it! But you’ll see, I’ll fix you. There’s no messing around with
me, we have manners, girl. Now the tune has changed, it’s not like out there
in the bush where you were spoiled. And if you don’t mind me, you know
what’ll happen, don’t you? Good, then sit with your back straight and for
heaven’s sake don’t whine like that, you’re hurting my eardrums. Quiet
now. That’s it, be quiet!
                                     3
                               ZOPPE

That February day in ’34, pink dust covered the buildings of Rome.
    There were three of them on top of him. One pinning him down, two
pummeling him. The youngest gripped Zoppe with all his might. The brutes
laughed with cheap zeal.
    “Yeah, Beppe! Hold him, get that darkie bastard good.” Beppe
complied.
    Zoppe could feel heat radiating from his skin. And he had soiled
himself like a baby. “Waan isku xaaray,” he cursed himself. “Shit ... why ...
me.”
    The words came out slowly. He felt humiliated, alone, a withered fruit
on an unripe vine.
    “Oh, Mama, when will this torture end?”
    Meanwhile, blood had begun to trickle from his mouth.
    “Mama ...” he called.
    Hooyooy macaan ...
    “This dumb nigger is talking to himself.”
    Hooyo ...
    “Camerati, this dummy’s still yapping.”
    Hooyooy macaan ...
    “He really wants to piss us off.”
    Hooyo ...
    “Let’s burn his feet, boys.” Hooyooy macaan ... “Let’s poke out his
eyes.”
    Hooyo ...
    “Let’s break his nose.”
    Not his nose, not his beautiful nose. With a kick in the rear Zoppe found
himself flat on the ground.
    “You’re disgusting, you know that, you little nigger?” Beppe taunted.
“And now you want us to clean up your shit too, eh, boss man?”
    “Come on,” his buddy replied. “Lick it up.”
    “Party’s over for you now, maggot,” the three added in unison.
    Zoppe saw the round toes of military boots over his head and squeezed
his eyes shut. And he thought of the blond little girl and her giant father.

                                      .
    Zoppe was intoxicated with fear. But at that vision he trembled with joy.
    The giant and his blond little girl. Oh, how he missed them. Wallahi, he
missed them to pieces.
    Seeing them in that strange dream haze was an unexpected surprise for
him. Why had they come? Had they heard his cry for help?
    “Xayaay, xayaay, xayaay, xayaay,” he’d cried.
    “Help,” he whispered as they tortured him.
    The father and his little girl ...
    They looked so nice together, strolling contentedly down the streets of
Prati. For months he had seen them walking hand in hand. They lived a few
buildings down from where he was staying. The first time they saw one
another, it was inevitable: he studied them and they studied him. Without
that vicious curiosity white people have, those ravenous hands in his curly
hair, those vile comments about the color of his skin. The father and the girl
looked at him with human eyes.
    It was so nice to see them again in that dense fog. The vision had plenty
of interference, but those two, the father and the girl, stood crystal clear
against that sky laden with uncertainty.
    He wanted to tell them, “Thank you for coming to see me in this dark
hour,” but can you say thank you to a vision? And his mouth was too
swollen with blood to be usable. He could only sputter curses and prayers,
in no particular order.
    In other circumstances, he would have stood up and embraced them. Yet
they remained shadows, projections, visions. They were neither made of
flesh nor bone. They were there worried about him. Every vision, as his
soothsayer father told him, always has some basis in truth, in the incarnate.
The man and girl weren’t really there, but maybe they were thinking about
him. They had sensed, glimpsed something, in a mental haze.
    Father and daughter didn’t know he was in danger, but sensitive souls
can catch a scent in the air like warthogs. Nothing ever gets past them, at
least according to his old man. Oh how wonderful it would have been to
actually touch them, smother them with affection, melt into their kind
concern. But Zoppe didn’t know how to embrace people. In his village in
Somalia, hugging was for the privacy of the marriage bed, the intimacy of
lovers. An embrace wasn’t something to spread around. Hugs weren’t for
friends or people you met.
    Zoppe couldn’t feel the brutal kicks anymore. All that existed were the
father and the girl, hand in hand, on the hilly streets of Prati.
    And then his mind drifted to his sister, Ayan ... “I miss you ...”
    “Magalo is so far away, my little sister. Magalo is so far from this city
I’ve ended up in. You must be grown now, you must be a woman. Tell me,
Ayan, what are you doing? There, now, what are you doing?
    Zoppe searched for her, but she wasn’t there. “I wonder if our father
taught you to read the stars,” he thought.
    He was thirsty. So, so thirsty.

                                      .
    “Let’s give it a rest, eh boys?” Beppe said after a while.
    “Yeah, otherwise we’ll kill him. They told us to just have some fun with
him. Not to kill him. He works for us, after all, and it’s not like we have
stockpiles of interpreters. My commander always says we ought to treat
these ones with kid gloves; they’ll be useful soon in the war against the
dirty Abyssinians ...”
     “But if he’s a nigger, what use is a nigger? Come on, man, be serious.”
     Zoppe barely heard their words. They could do whatever they wanted
with him. His fate was already written. It was all maktuub.
     He remembered his father telling him: “Look at the stars and then at
their reflection in the basin. In that light, you will find yourself.” How long
had it been since he’d performed the rites? Rome had made him so lazy. He
forgot to pray five times a day to Mecca, he forgot to bless his ancestors, he
even forgot the simplest duco.
     His father would have berated him and his sister, Ayan, would have
looked down on him. They wouldn’t listen to him and might not even
believe his complaints. “There are no stars here in Rome, you can’t see
them, they blend in.”
     “The stars,” his father would have said, “aren’t in the sky. You haven’t
even tried to look for them.”
     It was true. He was consumed by work. Every day he had to translate,
translate, translate, translate. There were words to decipher every minute,
sighs to indicate every second, and all those damned commas to figure out.
He was an interpreter, virtually a magician. It was a serious job, not like the
askari who had to blow the bugle and trek across the sand, cannon fodder
for the battlefield. He was always elegant in his khakis. Never an irksome
wrinkle to ruin his symmetry. He was one of the best in the field.
     Everyone told him he was the best. In a class of his own. Even a few
party officials had noticed him. He spoke Arabic, Somali, Swahili,
Amharic, Tigrinya, and several minor languages that would useful for the
coming war. He had gotten this gift from his soothsayer father. Italian, on
the other hand, came from the Jesuits. It had taken him some time to break
it in and master it. He thought that working for the country’s new masters
would yield him a nest egg. “I wouldn’t do that, my boy,” his father said
upon learning his intentions. “The stars say ...” But Zoppe interrupted him:
“Enough with the stars, Father. Real life is about money, and I want enough
to have a happy life and be the envy of everyone. I want people to kneel at
my feet.” His father looked at him the way one would look at excrement.
But he said nothing. We each have our own path to follow, our own
missteps to make. He fell silent and gave no more advice to that deranged
son fate had brought him. Zoppe was satisfied with that silence. His father
and all his wisdom got on his nerves. He was always so moral, so perfect.
“Let me make my own mistakes in peace,” Zoppe yelled once he was alone.
    “You’re not dead, are you, little nigger?” said Beppe, nudging him.
    Before those blows and insults there was a time when he had felt
fulfilled by that motley world that praised him, those people who
complimented him. It was Rome itself that had conquered him. When he’d
been told he would be going to spend a few months in Italy, in the Eternal
City, Zoppe thought it was a miracle. A Negro in Rome? Him?
    Rome was his dream, he knew it even before seeing it. “We’ll give you
some work. Mostly documents to translate.” He accepted that transfer like a
prize, recognition for his sacrifice, his loyalty. The work was plentiful, but
most of all, painful. Because those papers stank of betrayal. War was nigh
and some were already rushing into the victors’ open arms. They could
have said the same thing about him, even called him a collaborator. But he
wasn’t betraying anyone. He would never take arms against a neighbor, a
man with the same color skin. He translated, that’s all. He was a linguistic
ambassador, a mediator, he didn’t hurt anyone. His work involved the
present, the passing moment. And maybe he would end up with a nice
chunk of change. He would return to his land and build a big house one day.
There he would bring Asha, daughter of old Said the Sightless, there he
would take her, there she would become his woman, there she would raise
their heirs.

                                       .
    The vision was still there, comforting him.
    Father and daughter ... The streets ... The trees ... The dome of St.
Peter’s ... And the wisteria in bloom ... The women’s perfume ... Take-away
sorbet ... The soldiers’ military step ... The rustle of colored skirts ... The
cries of swaddled newborns ... Boots on cracked stones ... And another
father ... And another daughter ... The touch of their hands ... Their smiles
...
     Their hopes painted in the sky ...
     Zoppe was comforted by those murky, shaky images. By those visions,
softer than the wind.
     His photographic memory surprised him.
     He had recorded every detail, every nuance of the recent past. He
remembered the girl in particular.
     Her little flower-print dress, tan coat, red gloves, and that felt bucket
hat.
     What a pretty little head she had. An oval-shaped head that disappeared
entirely in that tiny old hat.
     She reminded him of his sister, Ayan.
     Ayan had a pretty head too. But Ayan never had a cute hat like that. “If I
come out of this alive,” he muttered, “I’ll get her one just like it.”
     Fists had been replaced by feet. They kicked him good and hard. Zoppe
clung to the vision so as not to give in to death.
     They were shadows in front of him, but it was to them that he entrusted
his soul. The girl smiled. Zoppe noticed tenderly that she was losing her
baby teeth.
     “If these goons ruin my nose, the little girl won’t recognize me.” The
thought of his face changing terrified Zoppe.
     “I hope your papa takes you away. As far away as possible. Yes ... as far
away from here as possible.”

                                       .
    Zoppe remembered going for lunch at the man and his daughter’s house
three months earlier.
    It was a Wednesday and there was an unusual air of anticipation in the
streets.
     The smells from the countryside formed a heady mix with the acrid
scents of the city.
     Horsehair, wild rose, and hay merged with automobile combustion and
motor scooter exhaust.
     “Why don’t you come to our house for lunch?”the little girl asked him.
     Zoppe, who was dressed in his usual khaki uniform, was taken aback by
the odd invitation.
     He was standing on the corner, ready to cross the street and rush toward
his daily life, toward more words to translate. The little girl was standing on
the same street corner.
     And her giant father a few steps away, shielding her from wind and
desperation. “Anyway my name’s Emanuela, with an E, mind you. I don’t
like it when they call me Manuela with an M,” and then taking a breath, she
added, “and this is my papa. His name’s Davide. Now shake hands. That’s
good, like friends.”
     And they shook hands. All three.
     The little girl had a know-it-all tone. Almost annoying. She liked being
bossy. You could tell that her parents spoiled her rotten, she was the darling
of the house. She had no discipline.
     But all the same there was something about her that delighted Zoppe.
The Somali extended his right arm and opened his hand to greet Davide.
     Zoppe noticed that he had a firm, powerful grip. A grip that put you at
ease and gave you a sense of trustworthiness.
     “So will you come?” the little girl implored.
     He had been observing them from afar for a while. The father and his
little girl. The little girl and her father.
     Same keen eyes. Same furrowed brow. At a glance the girl seemed
eight, maybe nine.
     The same age as Ayan.
     And she too had eyes that sparkled like emeralds in the sun. “So will
you come?” the little girl asked. What could he say?
     He had been in that strange land for months now and the girl with her
big father were the only people who ever gave him a nod of greeting. The
only ones in those nasty never-ending months. In that city that had been so
stingy with him. And to think that he had imagined blonde girls at his beck
and call and hordes of friends to play billiards with. But he had quickly
discovered that a Negro in Rome had to keep vigilant. “If possible,” one of
his supervisors had told him, “you should do everything you can to
disappear.”
     He had imagined Rome to be an open-air palace, but instead it was a
pisspot for dogs and humans alike. And sometimes the latrine stench turned
his stomach. But never as much as the sorrow of seeing how unliked he
was. Sometimes others’ disgust provoked unexpected gobs of spit that he’d
learned to dodge with great skill.
     That’s why he was supposed to disappear, make himself invisible.
     When he was out, he was always in a hurry. He wanted to be seen as an
optical illusion, not a Negro.
     Now he crossed Rome like a thunderbolt. No one noticed him anymore.
He was too fast to catch.
     He missed Magalo and the bovine slowness of that ocean city. There, he
was important, at all hours of the day and night. No woman snubbed him or
shunned him. He had all the women he wanted.
     “My name’s Emanuela, what’s your name, mister?” the girl asked.
     “My name is Mohamed Ali, but everyone calls me Zoppe.”
     “Zoppe because you’re zoppo?” the girl asked.
     “Yes, because of my limp. When I was little I caught a bad illness, but I
was saved.”
     “He was lucky,” Davide broke in.
     “Lucky ... it’s true,” Zoppe replied.
     “Papa and I have been seeing you around for a while, you know?” the
girl said.
     “Well, I’ve seen you too,” Zoppe wanted to tell them, but said nothing.
He waited for the strange passing pair to continue.
     “So will you come over? Huh? Will you come?”
     “I don’t know. I wasn’t prepared to have lunch out,” Zoppe replied,
embarrassed.
    “You don’t have to be prepared, mister.”
    “Don’t be rude, Emanuela,” her father admonished.
    “Don’t worry,” Zoppe cut in. “She’s young. I spoke that way when I
was little too. That’s the nice thing about that age, don’t you think?”
    “When you were little were you brown like you are now?” she asked.
The father went pale and reddened.
    “Emanuela, don’t make the gentleman uncomfortable.”
    “It’s fine, really,” replied Zoppe, amused. “I can answer your daughter.
Yes, brown when I was little too. The same way you’re pink, I was brown
and I still am, as you see.”
    “Are there ferocious lions in your town? I saw them in books at school.”
    “Yes, and zebras too,” Zoppe replied.
    “And rhinoceroses? Have you seen rhinoceroses?”
    “Yes, and more, there are antelopes, hyenas, giraffes, and one day I even
saw a herd of wildebeests ready to chase a dream.”
    “What’s a wildebeest? That’s not in my book. What is it like?”
    “It’s like a big cow with a hump and lots of hair.”
    “Do you eat it?”
    “I’ve never tried it.”
    The little girl looked at him in awe. Her father’s eyes were filled with
curiosity too. “This is the first time that a brown man is coming to eat with
us. And you’re lucky, today Mama made a big pot of artichokes and a
cherry tart.”
    “Sounds good. But I don’t have anything to bring you. Let me at least
pick up some cookies.”
    “You’re our guest today,” said Davide. “Today you’re sacred to us.
Tomorrow you can get cookies if you like.”
    Zoppe smiled. He was no longer used to kindness.
    “Well I’m curious too,” he added. “I’ve never been in a Catholic home.
Do you have a crucifix?”
    The girl looked at her father.
    Zoppe sensed that something in the cheerful atmosphere from before
had broken. “We’re different,” the father murmured.
     “The kids at school call me ‘killer.’ They say I killed God and my
family goes around stealing children. Yesterday, Graziella, the fat one who
still doesn’t even know the alphabet, pulled my hair and called me ‘pork-
hater.’ I started crying ’cause she pulled it so hard.”
     Zoppe didn’t understand, confused by the rush of words. “Emanuela,”
the father broke in, “is trying to say that we’re Jewish. Is that a problem for
you?”
                                      4
                                 ADUA

My father has never seen my movie. If he has he never told me.
     Haji Mohamed Ali, aka Zoppe, my father.
     It’s funny to feel the sound of that word in my mouth. When he was
alive, I didn’t call him Papa much. He was just Haji Mohamed. Haji
because, like every believer worthy of the title, he too had made a
pilgrimage to the Holy Land.
     And anyway the truth, my little elephant, is that we never got along.
     We both had strong personalities, we were prima donnas, battered by
life. Neither made room for the other and sparks were inevitable.
     Although by the end our relationship had become almost decent, in the
beginning it was out-and-out war between us.
     To me, my father was “the one who brought me into the world” or “the
man who impregnated my mother” or “the person who tore me away from
real life.”
     Never Papa.
     But since I’ve been bombarding myself with questions, elephant, I’ve
reclaimed this word. It has a bittersweet taste, the word “father.” Its spines
poke the tip of my tongue. But my palate is somehow soothed by it.
     The word makes me uncomfortable. It’s as if I have no support. As if it
delegated my happiness to someone else. The word father terrifies me. But
it’s the only one that can help me breathe anymore.
     I’m pretty rusty at saying it. I’m not used to its vibrations. I’m not used
to all its deep curves. And what if using it too much pushes me into a hole,
with no way out? Who will save me from myself then?
     You, elephant, or what? Father ...
     Aabe ...
     I say it again. I’ve gotten a taste for it. Father ...
     Aabe ...
     I’m old, flabby. Maybe I can allow myself this difficult truth with you.
     My husband, the boy I married, I never talk to him. I don’t even know
why we got married.
     He was a Titanic, someone who’d risked drowning at sea to come here,
a boater who landed at Lampedusa, a bum. He needed a house, a teat, a
bowl of soup, a pillow, some money, hope, any semblance of relief. He
needed a mama, a hooyo, a whore, a woman, a sharmutta, me. And even if
I’m all wrinkled, I was able to give him what he was looking for. I didn’t
want a nice young man like him out starving on Via Giolitti.
     I got him to toss that bottle of cheap gin that he bought from the Bengali
and that kept him warm on cold Roman nights. I got him to toss it and took
him in, here on Via Alberto da Giussano, in Pigneto.
     There were not many guests at our wedding. I called a few friends, we
ate sanbuusi.
     Someone gave me a shaash, like a regular virgin bride. They perfumed
me, massaged me, hennaed my hands.
     I wore an old costume that had belonged to the famous actress with the
gray eyes. I snatched it at Cinecittà during that fateful 1977. The cast was
just steps away from my set, from my movie. I’m not a thief, but that dress
felt like it was mine. It was a three-piece dress: bodice, capelet, petticoat.
One of those old outfits that could have come out of the closet of a Jane
Austen character. The ochre linen gave me a certain solemn air, which was
promptly broken by the pearly violet flowers dotting the dress. But it was
the taffeta petticoat that really gave me substance. That taffeta hidden from
the world made me feel precious. I was a cloud. Frothy and free like the
foam on a Guinness.
     The women sang ritual songs for the new union. I laughed. It was nice
to hear them. No one had ever sung for me. No one had ever celebrated me.
It was a joy, a great joy.
     And so I laughed, happy for all the tradition finally washing over me.
     The wedding made no scandal among the Somalis of Rome. “You did
the right thing, sister,” several of the women told me. “You chose your little
lamb well,” they remarked, winking.
     After all, I’m not the only one to do it, I wasn’t the first.
     There are lots of us now who have gotten a second youth with these
fresh arrivals. No one sees anything wrong with it. It’s a perfect trade. They
get a roof and we get a little attention. They kiss us and we sew their holey
socks.
     One day they’ll go away, toward love, other lands. But for now, they’re
curled up at our feet, ready to satisfy our longings.
     Every night my little man falls asleep on my droopy chest like a baby
hungry for milk. I rub his head and nestle my hand in his hair. It makes him
forget the cruel waves of the Mediterranean that nearly swallowed him up.
It makes him forget the tranquilizers they put in the bland soup at the
immigrant welcome center. It makes him forget the girl he used to love,
who was raped and murdered by Libyans in the desert.
     He dozes off on my grandmotherly breast and gets an erection. So many
times I’ve asked myself: “Don’t I disgust him?” But he says: “You’re so
beautiful. No woman is as beautiful as you.”
     Only when he gets mad does he call me Old Lira. That’s what young
Titanics call women from the diaspora. They are as cruel to us as we are to
them. It’s not fair to call someone who risked their life at sea the name of a
shipwreck. One time my husband even said to me: “I know that Titanic is a
movie where everybody dies. But remember that I’m not dead.” Old Lira, in
comparison, is harmless. And maybe it’s even true. When many of us came
to this strange peninsula it wasn’t the euro that captured our dreams, it was
still the lira, the beautiful lira that intoxicated with promises of wealth. Too
bad he won’t listen to me, my husband. He doesn’t want to know anything
about the past. He’s not interested. It bores him. He wants to drink the
future. Luckily I have you now, elephant, and I can vent.
     At first, all these memories scared me. I was afraid your big ears would
rip the soul from my chest.
   But now I feel calm. I can tell that we’ll last, you and I.
   You and your big ears are the only ones left to listen to my voice. The
world has long forgotten me.
   It’s only you, little elephant, who remembers me, Adua, beautiful Adua.
Only you.
                                    5
                        TALKING-TO

Is that how you greet a relative, Adua? With that look on your face? Smile.
What else have you got teeth for? Smile. Open that big mouth of yours.
And do it quick if you don’t want me to get mad.
                                    6
                               ZOPPE

Zoppe knew that the best escape route was through his head.
    That was the place where he found all the lost scents of his childhood.
There, caano geel, shaah cadees, beer iyo muufo.
    Candied ginger. Marvelous cinnamon. His Wonderland Somalia.
    Zoppe thought about all this crouched down on the cold floor of his cell
in Regina Coeli. His head between his knees and his thigh anxious against a
battered chest. Vertigo and stabbing pain coursed through his tired veins.
And his aching limbs felt defeated. He suspected he had two broken ribs. It
was hard for him to breathe and even to bend over.
    “Those bastards really mangled me.”
    And as if that weren’t enough, they had tossed him unceremoniously in
solitary. “This way you’ll learn what happens when you mess with us.”
    Beppe gave him a pat on the head before handing him over to the
prison. He touched him like a mother her young. Then he had him sip a
yellow liquid.
    “Drink, nigger, drink.”
    Zoppe gulped with difficulty. He made a horrified grimace and felt
something burning inside. Was he dying?
    Beppe patted him again. “Drink up, you’ll feel better.”
    And Zoppe drank and died once, twice, three times. Then with the
fourth sip, the warmth began to reach his spent cheeks.
    “My aunt’s walnut liqueur can revive even the dead. You’ll feel better
soon, you’ll see,” the soldier said, smiling.
    In that miserable cell where they’d stuck him there was a cot and a bowl
of slop. Limp potatoes floated alongside prickly worms. Zoppe was young,
he was famished, but he couldn’t bring himself to eat.
    “I don’t want to shit myself to death in this stinking cell.” The room was
square, gray, repugnant. Words inscribed with bloody fingernails covered
the walls with pain. Zoppe started reading to try to figure out what lay
ahead in his increasingly uncertain future.
    Mauro da Pisa, Alessandro da Bologna, Antonio da Sassari, Lucio da
Roma, Giulio da Pistoia, Simone da Rimini, have all passed through here.
The oldest date was 1923. The best inscription was dated 1932. Zoppe
recognized it immediately, the supreme poet was one of his favorites:

        Through me is the way to the city of woe.
        Through me is the way to sorrow eternal.
        Through me is the way to the lost below.

    “They’ve never cleaned up, that’s clear,” he said, addressing an
imaginary audience. Actually, he didn’t mind the quiet of that isolation. It
was a reprieve from the torture, from the senseless beatings that had defiled
him down to his soul.
    His tormenters would soon appear with their stinking farts and vulgar
taunts. But in the meantime there was that strange, rat-scented calm to
cradle him.
    The pain didn’t subside. It was his groin that hurt to death, especially
his testicles. Beppe had really beaten him badly. Zoppe asked himself if
after all those hits his seed would still be fertile. His testicles throbbed and a
yellowish liquid dripped from the tip of his penis. He felt heavy. And he
could barely open his puffy eyes.
    At the age of twenty he was an old man.
    A premature oday, with a drooling mouth and achy bones.
    He had his visions to comfort him. His mind catapulted him back into
the home of Davide the Jew and his little girl, Emanuela.
     He had recently been their guests, and the details were still so
effervescent and fresh in his mind that he could almost remember without
trying.
     He could see the sour cherry preserves that Rebecca, Davide’s wife, had
prepared for dessert. He’d filled up on that delicious tart and had also
relished what had come before.
     “What is this dish called?” he’d asked, astonished at his overflowing
plate.
     “It’s rigatoni con la pajata,” Rebecca replied.
     Just then Zoppe noted how much mother and daughter resembled each
other. The same wide forehead, the same big ears, and those sparkling
emerald eyes. But whereas Emanuela was exuberant like all children,
Rebecca had something mysterious and seductive about her.
     Zoppe envied Davide.
     And he said: “It smells good. I envy you this rich dish.” Davide
accepted that sweet envy.
     Looking around, there was really little to be envious of. It was all so
small. Even the furniture was tiny. The house was composed of two rooms
united by the reddish light that filtered in through a small window. The
kitchen with an iron stove was in plain view. In the middle, a table, some
tattered chairs and a flesh-toned armchair. The space was packed with
furnishings. In every detail there was a certain affinity for symmetry that
made such a chaotic space endearing. Zoppe was drawn to a blond walnut
cabinet with drawers covered in faux vellum. It was an exquisite object that
did not fit well with the overall simplicity. It was a little bit like Rebecca,
that cabinet, too refined to be the centerpiece of that set.
     Rebecca ... Davide ... Emanuela ...
     It was incredible for him to see white Jews. Zoppe had known only
Falasha Jews, the Beta Israel, from Lake Tana, even though his father had
told him that in the West there were Jews “with skin as pale as the moon.”
These were pink Jews, so cordial, and their Roman house so cozy and
inviting.
    Zoppe was blinded by the ochre walls that matched harmoniously with
the violet flooring. He was impressed by the hoard of books; they formed a
cathedral. And the knickknacks scattered all over the place: ceramic dolls
with real hair, decorative wall plates, tasseled colorful boxes and lots of
photographs of old people in shiny, faux, silver frames.
    Zoppe liked this middle ground where sour cherries intermingled with
knowledge.
    If he had his basin with him he’d have read the fate of those three
people. He would have seen their beginning and their end. All their
happiness and their atrocious suffering. Their passionate kisses and
betrayals. If only he had his basin he would have warned them about all the
dangers and joys of the world.

                                      .
     “Water,” he requested to the guard. “I’m thirsty.”
     “Not so fast, Negro,” was his answer. “You’re not at the Grand Hotel.
Learn some manners. You say ‘Water, please.’”
     “What difference does it make? You people don’t have good manners
anyway,” Zoppe retorted.
     “Ah, we’ve got a rebel here,” the guard said. “If times were different,”
he added, “we would have shown you, you piece of shit. In Regina Coeli
we don’t like rebels. You’re ticks, useless lice of humanity. In Regina Coeli
it’s easy to die of hunger or thirst, learn that. It’s easy to bring down that
cocky crest you’ve got. In Regina Coeli it’s a short path to the graveyard.
But you’re a damned lucky louse. They told me not to let you die. So I’ll
bring you your water. But mind you, I might not be able to kill you, but put
you through hell, that I can do.”
     Zoppe said nothing. He wanted to smash that fatso’s face. But he was in
chains. And weak all through his insides. Eventually he ate the slop of
potatoes and prickly worms. From the very first bite he could tell that his
stomach would refuse to digest it. Vomiting was the logical consequence of
an unwanted meal.
    Zoppe was a cesspool. The worms dropped from his mouth whole.
Restless worms, still alive and a little stunned. He could see them creeping
slowly over his wasted body.
    “Where’s my water?”
    He needed to try to sleep. But could one sleep in such a state?
    He wondered whether his father, Haji Safar, knew that he was in prison
now.
    “I’m sure he had a vision.” And Zoppe prayed that it hadn’t made his
father suffer too much.
    Happy images from his former life stopped the pain. The lively eyes of
his sister, Ayan, his father’s gentle hand, the discipline of the Jesuits who
had taught him Italian, and the intense letters from his Ethiopian friend
Dagmawi Mengiste. They surrounded him and urged him not to give up. He
saw their prayers spiral around him in an embrace of courage. “They love
me,” Zoppe thought, “and they’re thinking about me right now.” Even the
Limentani family was thinking of him.
    He could hear the little girl asking her mother, Rebecca, “How do you
draw a wildebeest, Mama? Do you think it has the same hump as a camel?
Why don’t we invite the brown man over for lunch again and ask him to
draw one for us?”
    Zoppe saw Rebecca’s face tensed in a mask of fear. Maybe she knew
about him.
    Maybe news of his arrest had spread.
    He’d ended up in trouble over Francesco Bondi, that Romagnolo with
the flat nose and yellow teeth.
    Zoppe appreciated nothing about that man. He was too tall, too
invasive, too chatty.
    He detested the droopy mustache and red hair that the Romagnolo
showed off like a trophy. Bondi was always there asking question after
question, waiting for amazing answers that Zoppe was never able to give.
    And also, he only ever talked about women—bottoms, bosoms, lips,
sex. Zoppe found him vulgar. Obviously.
     “Do you have a girl?” the Romagnolo often asked. But Zoppe didn’t
open up.
     Of course he had a girl, but he had no intention of telling that guy about
it. Asha the Rash was his woman. Every night in his dreams he savored the
moment when he would make her his. But he didn’t want to share such
private thoughts with anyone, let alone that lout Francesco Bondi. He didn’t
want to sully her beautiful name with a filthy person like him. The
Romagnolo ruined women, for sure. Every day he went bragging about his
conquests. Mirella, Graziella, Elvira, Carlotta. All of them with big busts
and big bottoms. All snatched up under the nose of distracted husbands.
These provincial Don Juan routines bored him. He didn’t have all that time
to waste. He had to work, not dawdle around. Zoppe’s greatest desire was to
impress his superiors. He wanted honors. He wanted cash. So he had to
look active. Lots of work didn’t scare him. Especially when he thought of
the nice gifts that he would be able to give his Asha the Rash one day.
     But then that strange morning came.
     Francesco Bondi pounced on him with breath that still smelled of sleep.
     Zoppe wasn’t alone. In that miserable and miniscule room he was
ashamed to call an office, there was a man with yellow hair.
     “Hey, Negro,” Bondi yelled euphorically. “I saw another Negro like you
on the street yesterday. I thought you were the only one in Rome.”
     Then the Romagnolo noticed the man with the yellow hair. “You’re not
military,” Bondi said, a little irritated. “What are you doing here?”
     “Don’t judge by appearances. I’m even more, in a sense. The name’s
Calamaro.” The two men shook hands hesitantly.
     “And this Negro you saw on the street, what was he like, if I may ask?”
     “He was a Negro, what do you think he was like ...”
     “They’re not all the same, did you know that?” said the man with the
yellow hair. “There are different types, in every region. Their hair and noses
diverge wildly. It depends on the climate.”
     “Hair? That stuff this guy has on his head, you expect me to call that
hair?”
     “Yes,” said Calamaro, calmly.
    “Are you kidding me?”
    Zoppe buried his nose in his papers and mentally wandered through the
city of Rome in search of the other African Bondi was talking about.
    There was definitely Menghistu Isahac Tewolde Medhin. The Eritrean
hothead. He ran into him one day around the Pensione Tedeschi on Via
Flavia. The Eritrean walked slowly, he didn’t worry about being seen too
much like Zoppe did. Medhin didn’t want to hide, let alone disappear. His
movements were filled with pride. He walked with his head high. He had
just finished at the Monte Mario international college run by the Methodist
Episcopal Church and was trying to figure out what the future held for him.
Zoppe didn’t like the man. His words were too learned, complicated. And
his avid anti-Italian ferocity terrified him. That man would soon get himself
into trouble. “I shouldn’t have anything to do with him, otherwise he’ll ruin
me.”
    As he was lost in these thoughts he saw Francesco Bondi’s hand sink
into his curly hair.
    “You call this hair? This is wool, not even good quality wool!”
    “It’s hair,” Calamaro replied calmly. “It’s not pretty, but it’s hair. The
gentleman is a Negro, but his features are less Negroid than the
anthropological specimens I examined in the Congo.”
    And then he too, no different than Bondi, sank his hand into the hair on
Zoppe’s exhausted head.
    The Somali exhaled with all the strength he had in his lungs and sat
there despairingly listening to the two Italians.
    He couldn’t say exactly when the discussion turned into something
more serious. Had it been Bondi who offended Calamaro, or maybe the
reverse? Zoppe was confused. He saw only, through his hair, that the two
had moved on to hands—their hands. Fists, in short.
    “Please, gentlemen,” said Zoppe, disconsolate. “Please,” he repeated.
Then he got the inauspicious idea of trying to break it up.
    The police arrested only him for that strange morning brawl.
                                     7
                                ADUA

A big storm was beating down on our camp when the man with the red
beard entered our tukul.
    That’s how things began with my father. That’s how I met him, little
elephant. That was the last happy day of my life. I was seven or eight years
old at most.
    I remember that our straw roof was soaked with water and it dripped
from every corner of our temporary dwelling.
    It was the ’60s, but I didn’t know that yet. I was just a flea and I
struggled with the shaky, provisional nature of our daily life. I was a
nomad, a little nomad with a pointy nose and I thought that life was
contained in the gleeful bleat of a baby goat. The rain that day was violent.
If we held out just a few minutes then it would be paradise.
    In the bush, the golden rule during torrential rain is curbing damage at
all costs. We all knew that after that brief initial difficulty the sun would
come out, even in our hearts. Hope, which had woven the threads of our
survival, would never abandon us. A greenish mold, meanwhile, was
expanding under our feet. It would bring the worst microbes, the most
insidious dangers. But we were used to it. The important thing, as the
camp’s old madwoman, Howa the Crooked, always said, was to dry the
bottoms of your feet well once it had all stopped. Si fiican u tirtir was the
motto. And already the cloth scraps on our wood ganbar were ready. Howa
would have appreciated, and maybe even smiled happily about our feverish
readiness. Because we truly were happy about the cruel rain that was
pounding over our heads. Wallahi! So happy. That rain was a true manna
from the heavens. Not by chance did everyone’s mind go to our rust-colored
basins filling up with good rainwater that would quench our thirst in the
coming days. Dreams soon gave way to worries of drought.
    I was used to rain.
    But that man with the red beard jarred with everything. He was so
different from the shepherds in our camp. He was as clean and smooth as a
young girl.
    And his turban had an almost blinding otherworldly glow. Between
white and light blue, it was almost frightening.
    Then came a sudden thunderbolt.
    But instead of coming from the sky, it came from the mouth of the man
who until that moment had been the center of my existence.
    “Girls, this man is your father,” Papa said.
    My sister, Malika, and I stood there staring at the man with the red
beard. I noticed that he was bowlegged and had a devilish goatee.
    And his back was curved like a pregnant woman’s. And also, why did
Papa introduce him to us as our father?
    I wanted to get rid of all of that angst.
    “You have to shake his hand. He’s your father. Aren’t you happy?”
    Malika and I were dying to ask, “Aren’t you our father?” But neither of
us had the nerve. Maybe it was Papa’s look, the look of the man who up
until that moment we’d considered our father, that dissuaded us. Maybe it
was also the eagerness with which he pushed us toward that unfamiliar,
lopsided man who inspired no confidence whatsoever. So we kept our
mouths shut. As if a crocodile had caught our tongues.
    We couldn’t even breathe. Or think.
    Around us, the bush howled fiercely like it did every night.
    I could hear the hyenas cackling and the fierce hunger of their obscene
feasts. The crows cawed. The gorgor snored.
    The lions made love to lionesses worn out with exhaustion. A woman
gave birth in pain.
    Malika and I stood there, barefoot, between two fathers.
    I didn’t like the new one at all. He was too old. Too hunched. He had
twisted feet, rotten teeth, and the receding chin of a false virgin.
    I looked at Papa with a silent plea for help. He broke eye contact and at
that moment I realized he was rejecting me.
    “Tomorrow you will leave with him for the big city, for Magalo,” he
said. Leave? For Magalo? Us?
    I had heard talk of the big city. Someone had told me that Malika and I
were even born there.
    I didn’t want to go. I sensed that the big city would swallow all my
purity, all my dreams.
    I was fine there with my goats, with my camels, and with that golden
land that had become part of my bones. The land and I lived for each other.
In harmony with the song of the elephants.
    I was a nomad. I didn’t want to be rooted.
    I was a nomad. I wanted to be free to run in the wind.
    Malika was different from me. She didn’t have many wants, no. All she
wanted was for people to love her. She was a person who only had to be
given an order and she would follow it. Even the most atrocious order was
for her the best possible solution. She refused to think, to decide. She didn’t
want to be vulnerable. Let other people do that. Her attitude was, My life
isn’t mine anyway.
    So she bowed to this new father. She shook his hand. She signed the
pact. She became his slave.
    And so with that submissive gesture, she gained his eternal love. I was
foaming with rage.
    “I don’t want to,” I shouted. “I want Mama. I want to stay with my
people.”
    Papa told me: “Asha the Rash was your real mother and we aren’t your
people. Your father, Zoppe, has asked for you. The woman who nursed you
is one of my wives. Call her ‘godaunt.’ You have different blood in your
veins. You must learn this, you must learn it fast. We have been your
caretakers.”
     I didn’t want to learn it. I wanted to see the woman who to me would
always be my mother. Mama was pretty. She smelled like jasmine.
     “I want my mama.”
     And that was when the bowlegged man broke into that absurd
conversation. “Your mother died when she brought you into the world.”
     “Yes,” my ex-father said. “She’s dead.”
     But I’d seen her just a few hours ago.
     “But I saw her ...” I murmured.
     “That’s not your mother,” the new father yelled.
     “But ...”
     “No ‘buts,’ you brat. Learn to trust my words. I am the one who brought
you into the world.”
     I looked at my sister with contempt. She had already surrendered to the
new order. I couldn’t bear such horror.
     I saw the old man, the one I would never call father, pick up a thorny
branch.
     Then he pulled me toward him and gave me two lashes. Two hard
lashes. This was my baptism.
     The thorns stuck in my skin.
     I was like the Christian Jesus, a martyr for sins I hadn’t committed. I
felt a deep sorrow well up from my unhappy gut.
     “Mama, where are you?” I lamented. No one answered.
     My papa, the one who had been my papa, left the tukul.
     I heard his steps rapidly move into the distance. I thought I heard the
echo of a sob. “Mama,” I called out. Then I fainted.
     When I came to, I had become an actress. No one would ever see my
real face again.
                                       8
                          TALKING-TO

Adua, why did you tell your teacher that your name is Habiba? How many
times have I told you, your name is Adua? Habiba is the name you had as a
nomad, the one that silly romantic of a mother gave you when she was
pregnant with you. Habiba is a dirty, filthy name. It’s a common name, for a
prostitute. Surely my daughter wouldn’t have such a common name, would
she? Habiba means love in Arabic ... bah, I spit on love! There is no such
thing as love. It’s a useless name, get it into your head. Adua’s much better.
You should thank me, I named you after the first African victory against
imperialism. I, your father, was on the right side. And you must never
believe the opposite. I did only the right things in life, only the right things.
Not like that good-for-nothing Asha the Rash. The only truly rash thing
your mother did was die. She did nothing else, just die. Whereas I, on the
other hand, fought alongside the just. Inside your name there’s a battle, my
battle ...
    You don’t believe me, do you? Do you dare doubt me?
                                    9
                               ZOPPE

That night Zoppe dreamed about Benito Mussolini’s war.
    In that muggy dream the war began in a place like so many in the Horn
of Africa, where animals were taken out to pasture. A border zone where it
was easy to lose your head and fight with the nearby Ethiopians.
    The casus belli that Benito Mussolini was yearning for to officially
wage war against Ethiopia.
    Was it a dream or a vision of the future?
    Zoppe had never known how to distinguish between reality and fantasy.
He had never learned to manage what he saw very well. Haji Safar had
taught him, but he lacked the soul. The second soul that Haji Safar had, the
one that allows you to enter into empathy with time.
    The second soul.
    He was sick of hearing his father say that he didn’t have that damned
second soul. “I’ll make do without! Plus, if you’ve got money, what do you
need an extra soul for?”
    Zoppe remembered the smell of sulfur in the dream. Nothing else. He
woke up with fright. With the feeling that he’d dreamed something terrible
that would perhaps take over his little life too. Something that could be
sensed even without a second soul.
    “What’s all that racket?” the fat guard asked his colleague.
    “It’s black face going crazy.” And then in a strange show of mercy, he
said, “Maybe we should give the guy a bath. Otherwise the fleas’ll eat him
alive.”
    “Let’s take care of it tomorrow,” the big one said.
    Zoppe scratched his head. What time was it? How long had he slept?
Was it daytime or the middle of the night?
    He suspected that making him lose his sense of orientation was part of a
plan. They wanted him to drive him crazy.
    Zoppe curled back up in the cot. He closed his eyes and began to
summon a vision. The first image that came to him was his sister, Ayan,
looking for red peppers in the Warta Nabbada souk in Magalo. “That means
someone at home is making stew today and the good fragrant injera with
the holes that the Ethiopians showed us how to make.” Zoppe preferred
Ethiopian to Somali injera. Yes, he really disliked the Somali kind. It was
small, meager, dry. The Ethiopian kind was sour and soft. With the
Ethiopian kind, sauce, any sauce, absorbed deep down. Whereas with the
Somali kind, sauce slid off without the least resistance. It was hard for him
to admit that Ethiopians were better at making injera, but it was the truth.
    But with rice and meat, Zoppe consoled himself, there’s no contest. The
bariis iskukaris we make is the best on earth. Bariis iskukaris, where the
meat, rice, and cardamom blend together to satisfy palates ready to drown
in a sea of perdition. Ah, bariis iskukaris ... Zoppe wondered if he would
ever eat it again.
    Nothing but slop, worms, in that cell.
    Meanwhile his sister, Ayan, was looking for potatoes at the market
stalls.
    The cell filled with different aromas and concentric visions. Zoppe
didn’t dare reopen his eyes for fear that they would leave him too soon. He
had to keep them there with him in that dark cell as long as possible. He
needed their company, their comfort.
    And then the cadar which Somali women use to perfume themselves
began to mix in with the myrrh that Asha the Rash used to make their
environment more pleasant. And then the cinnamon, incense, sandalwood,
golden amber, passionflower, ripe mango, healthy papaya, sensuous
pineapple.
    Somalia was a step away.
    He just had to grab it. He just had to dream it.
    And from Somalia he was catapulted to a back street in the Prati quarter
of Rome.

                                       .
    All it took was a glance at her face to see how much she was suffering.
Poor, sweet little Rebecca.
    She was a vision too. A stronger, more incarnate vision. Almost real.
    “Why have you come to see me, woman? Why here in this cell?” Zoppe
wanted to ask the vision, but ultimately he said nothing, because he already
knew the answer.
    “You’re a wizard, right?” Rebecca’s shadow asked. Zoppe never liked
to answer questions with a yes or no.
    Certainties were the devil’s daughters. He was well aware. Salvation lay
only in doubt. In that middle ground where the gears rebelled against the
master clockmaker. But she needed him. She was so desperate.
    “I’m a seer, or rather, my father is, and my dear aunt too. I see things,
but I don’t have the gift. I see but I don’t know what to do with my visions.
I feel the vibrations of the universe. I read the world, but I don’t know how
to decipher it.”
    Suddenly, Rebecca’s eyes lit up with interest. “What do you mean?”
    “Just what I said,” replied Zoppe.
    “And what am I now? Why am I here?”
    “I don’t know,” Zoppe replied slowly. “That depends on you.”
    “I’m in bed and I’m dreaming. And in the dream I find myself in this
foul cell. And in the left corner there are five dead rats. I’m afraid of rats,
even dead ones. But now I have no urge to scream. I don’t feel afraid here.”
    Zoppe couldn’t say anything to that shadow. Say that he was the one
who wanted to see her. That maybe it was only his dream, a projection. He
couldn’t say that he found her beautiful, fascinating, enchanting, that he
desired her as much as, sometimes more than, Asha the Rash. That he’d
dreamed of her naked, white, pure, almost every night since first seeing her
at her little house in Prati. And that he envied her husband, the giant
Davide, for all the orgasms given and received, for all the sighs, for the
intimate conversations whispered at dawn.
    There was also another reason he couldn’t tell her anything. The woman
was in danger, Zoppe could feel it. Aside from desire, he felt a boundless
sorrow for her.
    But things were changing, everything was changing. Zoppe could feel it
in the air.
    There was a hostility toward the Jews that with every day became more
overt, more bold-faced, more hateful.

                                        .
    It was Aunt Bibi who, years before, had taught him to read animal
entrails.
    He never called her “aunt,” just Bibi. In Swahili, “bibi” means Mrs.,
lady. She was the lady of the house, of hearts and of reclamation. It was
Bibi who presided, giving orders at the xus for our ancestors and hosting the
commemorative zab. She was the one who decided which goats to buy, in
what order to butcher them.
    Zoppe saw himself as a little boy again in Bibi’s yard. He was maybe
four or five, playing with a baby goat full with milk. The kid had suckled
hungrily from the maternal teat only a moment before, and now, like any
other little one, she just wanted to enjoy the company of the butterflies
fluttering lazily around her tail. She was pretty, the little goat, sweet. Little
Zoppe wanted to cover her with kisses. Pet her soft coat. And learn her
uncertain language made of high and low baaaas. What he would have
given to understand her, to talk to her. She would have been so charming.
She had a lively face, all round and soft.
    But without warning, Bibi broke through that explosion of affection.
His aunt, with her great stature and necessary cruelty put an end to the idyll
between the little boy and the baby goat.
    “Get out of the way, you little balaayo,” and with a push, she shoved
him away. “But we were playing ...” stammered Zoppe.
    “She’s done playing,” and she grabbed her by the neck with her plump,
capable hands.
    Zoppe remembered her stunned eyes, her confusion, her increasingly
tortured bleats. “Where is this big woman taking me?” those sweet eyes
asked. And Zoppe didn’t have the heart to answer that sweet little goat.
How could he admit to her that beyond that yard there was nothing but
death awaiting her?
    He suddenly felt cold. And he started convulsively rubbing his body.
    “Help her, Lord, when the blade enters her.” He sat down and curled up,
in wait. And he waited to hear the last cry of his dear friend.
    The cry of death did not take long to arrive.
    Hours later, the goat’s insides were presented at lunch. Zoppe was
surrounded by ravenous mouths waiting to feast.
    Zoppe was a good boy. And tears fat as bushels of hay ran down his
smooth, oval face.
    “What is it, sweet boy?” Bibi said.
    “It’s ...” and he couldn’t manage to finish the sentence.
    “You don’t like it? This is a special dish, you know. The goat is
nourished on its mother’s milk until the very end. Then, once the animal is
butchered, the intestine is removed while it’s still full of milk and mother’s
love. The intestine has to be removed very carefully, otherwise it will break.
Then you cook it and make baug, which is like the cheese gaal make.
Infidel’s cheese. A stringy paste that melts in your mouth.”
    Little Zoppe hesitated before the steaming tray. Could he really eat a
friend?
    Then his aunt stuck a piece in his mouth. And he melted at the taste of
those succulent entrails.
    He felt like a murderer.
    “She died for a good cause, don’t be sad for her. Everyone dies sooner
or later.”
    Sooner or later ...
    And that was when Bibi told him: “Look at the folds on the insides.
From them, you can read the world.”
    A deep scar lined those soft mounds.
    “I don’t see anything. It’s all mixed up.”
    “Look, son, look harder. Don’t you see that stretch of the road to
Galkayo? Don’t you see a man carrying a bundle? And don’t you see the
horrible vulture lurking overhead? Don’t you see the sky laden with
promise? Don’t you see the hyena giving birth in pain? Don’t you see the
children on the pasture? Don’t you see the sweet bulbul bird that cheers the
heavens? Observe that scar, smell the fresh baug. Get nice and close. Let
yourself go. There is the aliif and the taa. The miim and the ra. The saad
and the daad, the shiin and the siin.” Bibi enumerated the letters of the
alphabet, showed them to me in the entrails. “Here you’ll find the writing of
the world and little by little you too will learn to decipher it.”
    Zoppe moved his nose close to the plate. And he smelled a strange odor
of aged cheese.
    He looked at the scar again. And he saw her, the little goat. She was
skipping around happily and the butterflies gaily joined in.
    “You’re grown up now, my boy. We are the descendants of tribes that
have been lost in the night of time. And the history that runs through us has
brought more knowledge to our already full treasury. And today, you have
become a faaliyaha, a soothsayer. Sweet boy, none of us can escape his
destiny. Now eat your baug, otherwise it’ll get cold.”
    “What a fine destiny,” thought little Zoppe, and he dug in.
                                    10
                                ADUA

“Tell the stories you have, as best you can.”
    That’s not my quote, it’s from a famous writer. I didn’t know who he
was. But yesterday I flipped through one of his books at the grocery store. I
opened it randomly and that line popped out. I read it a few times. At first I
didn’t even understand it much. But then something in my gut told me that
maybe that random sentence had more to do with me than I could imagine. I
frantically dug through my purse for money. In hard times one has to do
things a certain way. Every cent has its weight. The fact is, I wanted that
book so badly. I really, really wanted it. I grabbed the story collection with
both hands. To give me some motivation, infuse my tired veins with a little
courage. I was trembling. In the end the book cost me nineteen euros. That
meant giving up my wheat semolina, chunks of squash, citron soda, and
new potatoes.
    I didn’t buy anything I needed to buy. No liquids, no solids. I bought
pages.
    The shelves filled with delights looked out at me disconsolately, a little
shocked. I was abandoning them. The pistachios were dejected, the spreads
sad, the mustard prey to an entirely new panic. Was I really abandoning
them?
    Meanwhile, the book did a polka in my green bag. Happy to have a new
owner, a new house, a new reader.
    Meanwhile, I thought of my little husband all full of spunk. The young
man “Made in Lampedusa” who I got on sale anyway.
    What would I make for him that night? “I’ll give him yesterday’s leek
soup.”
    My boy has a healthy appetite. He likes everything I make him.
    It’s hunger, the hunger he suffered crossing the Sahara desert, that
makes him as docile as a little lamb.
    He’s not one of those brutes who expect steak every day. He’s just as
happy with the stew of leftover vegetables I make in lean times. By the end
of the month meat is too much of a luxury for us. But no one will take our
roasted half-goat with potatoes at the beginning of the month away from us.
Then he sucks every bone dry like a teat full of milk.
    The only thing my little one can’t give up is shaah, our cardamom,
cinnamon and clove tea. When he drinks it he sweats like a pig, but then I
see him shine with an entirely different light inside. When he’s in a good
mood he even pours in a little milk and makes a shaah cadees that takes him
back to childhood.
    I don’t drink cadees anymore. It ruins your figure. Gives you cellulite.
    Gets you with water retention.
    But when my little husband, my sweet little Titanic, sips a brimming
cup of it sprawled out in front of the TV, I confess, I feel jealous.
    So much nostalgia for old times.
    My father, Mohamed Ali Zoppe, liked cadees too. I’m sure it was the
excessive amounts of sugar he put in it that led him to death. Diabetes had
turned him into a swollen, noxious blob. So I was told—I wasn’t there
when he passed, between flatulence and regret. But my father always added
a dash of ginger to his cadees. He said that sanjibiil “reinvigorates the
manhood and warms the muscles.” I don’t know if ginger works like
Viagra. But as far as warming goes, it works. On cold winter nights it’s a
lifesaver. I recommend it, my little elephant. Yes, a real lifesaver.
    The first time I saw my father, or Zoppe as I called him at the time,
adding ginger was at the house of Hajiedda Fardosa, one of his wives. My
mother, Asha the Rash, as I found out later, was the first. But when she died
bringing me into the world she was immediately replaced by a girl with
braids and her first period. So I was told. That night, that first night when I
saw him add ginger, I’ll never forget.
    He had dragged us from the bush to the city by the sea, tearing us away
from what I thought of as my family, my mama.
    I’m speaking for myself, because of course Malika, my sellout of a
sister, had followed along meekly.
    That night, that cursed night, was the first of my new life. Hajiedda
Fardosa lived in the city by the sea.
    Magalo was a port city, one of the many on the south-eastern coast of
Somalia. “Here are your roots,” he told us. “It is here that you will bring
your glory.” Magalo wasn’t as big as Mogadishu, but it wasn’t a two-bit
town either. Magalo had schools, offices, a nice big city hall, several
mosques, a Catholic church, a library, a branch of the central university, a
bookstore, a pasta factory, two markets, a stationery store, four cafes, three
restaurants, a hardware store, two boutiques, three tailors, a dry cleaner, and
lots of other things. It was in Magalo that real life happened. In order to be
somebody you had to be a part of that cursed homeland. And Magalo had a
sea that took your breath away.
    Only there did the Indian Ocean roar with pleasure. Only there did the
whales come to make love at sunset.
    At first I didn’t like Magalo. For me, it was a usurper. One who wanted
to take the place of my adored little goats. One who had torn me away from
my parents, the people I loved most in the world.
    It was hate at first sight between me and Magalo.
    Magalo was the end of a life, an ominous change of destiny.
    And Magalo was also home to Hajiedda Fardosa. I don’t remember
much about that fateful first night. Except one detail. On the ground I saw a
female lion skin. It seemed alive and so proud of being the most beautiful.
The coat was intact. A perfect shade of gold. I felt sorry for her. I had seen
many in the bush. They were vicious and bloodthirsty. But there was
something magical in their wandering. Nothing like the dirty, vulgar hyenas
we always had to deal with. The lionesses’ stride was that of precarious
nobility fighting against scarcity and bullets. The stride of a queen whose
crown had been stolen by a male.
   I looked like that skinned lioness. I too was proud and trapped. Proud
and confined in the baroque house of the revered fat wife.
   I remember that night, that unforgettable night; the pungent odor of
burned myrrh pervaded the air. It made me sneeze and I felt the strange
specter of fear hover like a vulture over my live carcass.
   “You’ll have to civilize them,” my father told Hajiedda Fardosa.
“They’re savages. Especially the taller one.”
   And that was when, after those cutting words, I saw him add a pinch of
ginger to his shaah cadees.
                                  11
                        TALKING-TO

Adua, go apologize to your sister right now. Who taught you to be so wild?
Is it your desk mate teaching you these things? Starting tomorrow you
won’t speak another word to her. Who knows what she put in your head.
You’re like your mother, Asha, you trust everyone around you. The world is
cruel, Adua, you shouldn’t trust anyone. Now be off. I believe I’ve made
myself clear.
                                   12
                               ZOPPE

Everyone was waiting for Maria Uva.
    Eyes glued to the cliff. Spirits in nervous anticipation. “Will she be
wearing our tricolor?” Orazio Civa asked Zoppe.
    “Maybe,” the Somali said with little enthusiasm.
    “Ah, Maria Uva, they say you’re as beautiful as a siren.”
    “Sirens, mister,” Zoppe said disdainfully, “are dangerous creatures,
especially here in Port Said.”
    “But I’m as strong as Odysseus, Zoppe my friend, there’s no siren who
could resist me; Maria should watch out. And I want to immortalize her in
my notebook. Up to now I’ve only drawn birds and a few wayward fish. A
pretty lady would be a nice addition, don’t you think?”
    Civa had a nice smile and eyes that recalled the forests of Europe’s far
north. A handsome fellow, dark hair, refined bearing, medium height, and
biceps that not even the Laocoön at the Vatican Museums could match.
    Civa’s looks were something that emerged gradually, with time and a
certain dose of perseverance. He wasn’t a heartthrob out of a romantic
melodrama, listless and vain. He didn’t have the sparkle of someone like
Rudolph Valentino. He was more like Amedeo Nazzari, a man to be
discovered frame by frame. But women are impatient. And a good-looking
man like that found himself all alone sighing over a mirage that was about
to appear over an Egyptian cliffside.
    Maria Uva.
    Frenzy over Maria Uva, the patriot Maria, the mature, plump Italian
woman the legionnaires pined for. The one with the high-pitched voice who
saluted the future soldiers in the war that fascism was preparing for.
     “She’ll come out soon, I want to be ready, my heart is already racing for
her.” Zoppe studied the young man and found him a mix of contradictions.
     His sentimentality didn’t fit well with his blind and total loyalty to the
National Fascist Party that he loved showing off at society events.
     Civa said that Benito Mussolini was a beacon, the light of all
knowledge. He also claimed that he would swallow even the bitterest pill
for his Duce.
     But then there was that dissonant note in his crystalline voice. The one
that made you doubt his loyalty to fascism.
     You would stare at his light eyes to figure out the truth, but they knew
exactly how to evade scrutiny.
     But Zoppe didn’t care whether the boy was a fascist or not. To him, he
was a tool, the weapon that destiny had provided him to free him from his
jailers. In the end he was grateful to Civa. Without his help he would have
probably been left to rot in that hovel, Regina Coeli.
     It had all happened so fast that day, the day he was freed, months ago.
     One of his guards, the bigger one, had come over and said to him,
“Negro, we have to wash you today.” And his colleague added as a little
joke, “Maybe rubbing you with soap will turn you white.”
     That morning, besides the promise of being clean there was also a timid
ray of sunlight penetrating the cell to cheer him.
     Rome was covered in pink dust.
     Maybe the tramontane is coming, the old people said.

                                       .
   “Cat got your tongue?” asked a sergeant whom Zoppe had never seen
before.
   The room was full of light and Zoppe had been dumped there
unceremoniously by the guards.
   Finally clean, shaven, groomed, he felt like he could meet the soldier’s
gaze. That irked the sergeant.
    “There’s someone outside who has come to collect you. You will finish
your sentence in the service of the distinguished Count Anselmi, a father of
the nation, a more illustrious fascist would be hard to find. The count wants
you. He insisted on having you, you know. In no time at all he moved
heaven and earth, you know how these counts are, and in a certain sense he
bought you. Your fate was decided at the highest levels. Thank your saints.
Be glad. You were lucky, louse, keep that in mind. You earned yourself an
entirely different destiny and you know it. But the count wants you and
there’s nothing I can do about it.”
    The sergeant gritted his teeth at that last sentence.
    Zoppe remembered Haji Safar’s words. “Qofkii aammuso waa
dhintay.” He who chooses silence is already dead.
    And he decided that even if the battle was lost, he could at least try to
fight the future ahead of him.
    He didn’t want to die a count’s slave.
    “But ...” He had trouble getting the words out. “But, sir, I can’t go into
the service of a count. I have a job to finish at the base, in Rome.”
    A thunderous laugh filled the room, burying his minute words.
    In that same room were also the three goons who had beaten him days
ago. “Are they going to start up again?” he wondered.
    He felt a pang in his chest and a pitiful creak between his balls. That’s
where Beppe had hit him the hardest.
    “Here are your friends. Aren’t you happy to see them again?” To
distract himself from that miserable sight his eyes began to wander. A lone
portrait of Benito Mussolini stood out on the wall. No trace of the king.
    “Maybe,” Zoppe wondered, “they forgot about the king?”
    It was a sad room. The gray walls gave it a touch of claustrophobia,
which rendered every sensation stagnant. No flowers, no family photos, not
even scratch paper with doodles or stubby pencils for company. A layer of
pink dust remained the single sign of life.
    “For a while, boy, you’re done with the base.”
    “But ... if ... that is, that’s the only reason I’m here, to translate, they
sent me specially. Has anyone notified the priests?”
     “Forget about your Jesuits. Erase them from your memory. Only they
could dump a Negro like you in Rome. And to translate what? There’s no
war yet. You would have been useful later. Right now you’re only in the
way. We tolerate Father Evaristo’s little priests because the Vatican gave us
strict orders to do so, and it’s trouble if you ruffle a single hair on their
heads. But we’ve got their number, oh yes, we do.”
     Zoppe sank to the floor like a rag.
     “Come on, don’t be like that. We don’t want to hurt you. Consider this a
little chat among friends.”
     Zoppe’s hand instinctively went to shield his groin. He would defend
his manhood even if it cost his life. They wouldn’t leave him sterile. Death
would be better. And he had promised Asha the Rash, beautiful Asha, that
he would come back to Magalo and marry her.
     Zoppe bit his tongue.
     And he began mentally reciting a prayer, one he had known since
childhood, that had the ancestral power of driving away the evil spirits that
whispered horrors in the heart of creation.
     “We found an interesting photo among your personal effects.” Photo?
They’d searched his room.
     “Pretty girl, this one. How old is she? Nine? Ten? Her chest isn’t too
developed yet, I see ... hmm ...”
     Ayan, his sister.
     What chest was this guy talking about? She was still a child. He felt a
wave of disgust.
     The photo was from a year ago. Ayan had an innocent, expectant look.
Braids close-knit like ants framed a perfectly oval head. And her big lips
were bursting with stories and laughter.
     She was pretty and sweet, his sister.
     One day, like a good brother, he would give her away to the best of
men. But now, Zoppe wondered, would he live long enough to keep that
promise? What would Ayan do without her brother?
     If those three fascists went back to work on him, he wouldn’t live
through it. “Your sister, right? We know.”
     Zoppe shivered. Please, not Ayan, Lord, save her from his madness.
     Not a single muscle on his face betrayed his concern. Zoppe opened his
big dark eyes wide to show them he wasn’t afraid and that their threats had
no effect on him.
     But his temples throbbed and his stomach juices jetted into his
esophagus. Back straight, chin out, eyes fixed, shoulders wide.
     “It would be a shame if something happened to this little girl, don’t you
agree?” and then he snapped his fingers with a sound that to Zoppe was
louder than the bells of St. Peter’s.
     Snap. Snap. Snap.
     Beppe stepped forward.
     The scene went by so fast that Zoppe had almost no time to figure out
what was happening.
     Beppe unzipped his fly, pulled out his penis, rubbed it for a minute and
then released his warm spunk all over little Ayan’s photo.
     “Ugh, what a careless soldier,” the sergeant said. “It would be a shame
if something like this happened to your sister, wouldn’t it?”
     Zoppe was shaken, but his face remained impassive.
     “She’s at Via Cardinal Massaia, in the Littorio Quarter ... the one you
Somalis have the nerve to call Warta Nabbada.”
     Via Cardinal Massaia ... no one called it that. Everyone knew that was
Haji Safar’s street, the street of the soothsayers and storytellers. That was
where the stars were studied and worlds were glimpsed in the eyes of
newborns.
     The Italians had stuck some unknown cardinal’s name on it. There was
a Via Cardinal Massaia in Mogadishu too, in Xamar Weyne, right in the
middle of the marketplace.
     The name was an abuse in Mogadishu too.
                                    13
                                 ADUA

There was a small movie theater in Magalo, the fascists built it in the ’30s
—an ideal vehicle, they thought, for colonial propaganda. There were
several in Somalia. Ours was a movie theater intended for the local
population. It was so run down, with busted seats and a sheet metal roof,
nothing compared to the Cinema Xamar in Mogadishu, with its austere
Mussolinian structure. Magalo’s little cinema had no pretensions—it was
plain, subdued, almost hidden. The people loved it, it felt like it belonged to
them, like the well in the center of the city, the city hall, the livestock
market, the goldsmith square. When the Italians left in 1960, a magnate
born in the old quarter of Xafad, a man named Idris Shangani, decided to
restore it. Idris Shangani was one of those Somalis who had made money
during colonialism by sending bodies to the front during Italy’s war against
Ethiopia. Then after the end of World War II, when the United Nations
decreed that Italy and the newly-formed Trust Territory of Somaliland
would ferry us to independence, Mr. Shangani got even richer.
    “He was a crook, that one!” my father repeated daily at lunch.
    “He was a collaborator, they’re the worst.” He trembled as he said that
word, his voice broken, fragmented. A tremor went through his whole body,
turning him to jelly. My father grew agitated and spit on the ground, his
mouth filled with curses and insults for the figure who in his eyes
incarnated the greatest sin.
    But these outbursts were rare for him, because Father didn’t like to talk
about the past.
    Yes, he preferred to keep quiet.
     Sure, Mr. Shangani was a crook, but how lucky we’d been to have him
as a fellow citizen of Magalo! Without his money we would have never
known about the existence of Ava Gardner or Norma Jean. The movies they
showed were dated, but in Magalo, where there’d never been anything of
the sort, those old films dubbed with literal translations from Italian were
manna from the heavens. In Magalo, thanks to the big screen, the women
had an hour every day to dream. They lined up after the Dhuhr prayer, only
after stuffing their fat husbands with food. They never managed to see a
whole film, they didn’t have time. At home there was the mending, ironing,
cleaning, cooking, nursing the children, bathing the grandparents. They
went to the little cinema just to catch a few frames, a few fleeting details. In
fifteen minutes they’d decided whom they loved and hated. Lots of them
needed just five minutes, the minimum to get lost in the blue eyes of a
fleeting Paul Newman. The virgins of Magalo, however, preferred Gregory
Peck. And they were all crushed when, almost without a fight, he let go of
that sweet flower Audrey Hepburn ... And then there were cowboys and
Indians, every little boy’s favorite. It took only a moment to turn a movie
into a shared game played on Magalo’s blistering sands. Most cheered for
the Indians, of course, which makes sense—they were more impressive.
They had trouble relating to John Wayne. “He waddles like a pig,” the kids
yelled. And on the blistering beaches they made a show of imitating the
heavy walk that made Wayne look like a freshly infibulated girl, the stitches
still enflaming her tender vagina. No, no, the Indians were better. They had
boundless bravery and those fantastic feathers.
     Yea for the redskins, down with the John Waynes!
     Magalo’s little cinema was called Il Faro, The Lighthouse, or Munar as
we say in Somali.
     In fact everything was a munar, in Magalo. Everything was a reminder
of the great labor of our forefather Torobow, who had erected the tower that
later became our city’s beacon by his strength alone. In Magalo, wherever
you went, you saw a lighthouse. There was the Munar nightclub, the Munar
grocery, the Munar Italian bakery, Munar Square.
    Our lighthouse was considered, like the one on Cape Guardafui, one of
Somalia’s historic monuments.
    My father no longer liked the lighthouse after it was modified in the
thirties. “They defaced us,” he would say.
    But if you asked him to elaborate he shied away like a virgin at her first
kiss. The additional element Papa hated so much was the blade of an axe.
With that, Torobow’s Moorish tower was transformed into a grandiose
fasces lictoriae, the bundle of rods symbolizing fascist power.
    “For the perpetual glory of Rome,” was inscribed on the base. For me,
reading that inscription made me long for that faraway Rome, full of la
dolce vita and cabaret.
    I didn’t understand fascism then.
    The memory of it was already gone. And you would always find people
like Idris Shangani who would happily tell you how life wasn’t so bad
under the Italians. Usually it was a former askari or a madama who hadn’t
minded being a kept woman. But how could a little thing like me
understand those details? One master is as good as another, that was the
gist. And Magalo wasn’t Mogadishu; in Magalo, history went by at an
angle. There was no Abdullahi Issa, the spirit of Somali independence, to
educate us. To explain to the little people of Magalo that the value of our
land lay in us, African citizens, architects of our own destiny. No one had
ever told us that colonialism was the problem. Even those who knew the
truth said nothing. My father, for example, said nothing.
    He muttered a few things, comments so vague they didn’t express, they
didn’t explain. I was a little girl, I didn’t think about political matters.
    I wanted to be like Norma Jean. I didn’t care about the rest. I wanted the
lights, the makeup, the awards, the red carpets, the passionate kisses.
    I wanted to dream, dance, fly. I wanted to escape. Italy was everywhere
in my life.
    Italy was kisses, holding hands, passionate embraces. Italy was
freedom. And I so hoped that it would become my future. In Magalo, before
the socialist nationalist Siad Barre came to power, lots of Italians lived in
the city. You would see them strolling down the main boulevard in their
elegant clothes at sundown. Perfect ties and cufflinked sleeves. Women
often sported pretty little hats that transformed their petite frames into proud
and beautiful Grace Kellys. The Italians opened restaurants and gelato
shops. The wealthiest had banana plantations just outside the city. At
school, among us girls, we would talk about their beautiful houses and the
legions of servants they had looking after them. We were jealous, I admit it.
And more than one dreamed of marrying an Italian when she grew up.
     It was Papa who dragged me and Malika to the Munar cinema for the
first time. We had been in Magalo for a month when it happened. The
trauma of separation was still fresh. The wound still raw. The bush was still
there, frozen in front of my dark eyes.
     Papa Zoppe hated Mr. Shangani, but he loved cinema too much to
deprive himself of such a joy.
     That day, when we came home from school, he told us: “Tonight we’re
all going to the cinematograph.” He was happy. I was not. I was alone,
terribly alone.
     I missed the goats and in my dreams I cried for my mama, the woman
I’d thought was my mother.
     “Mama, rescue me,” I called out to her. “Mama, help me,” I begged.
But the nights went by and no one came.
     Only the broken coo of romancing owls soothed my fitful sleep.
     Especially at night, I couldn’t accept my new condition as a city girl,
even if with every day my body was slowly adapting to the sweet
seductions of a too-comfortable life. I was getting used to it—almost
without noticing— to silence, a soft mattress, and morning breakfast, injera
with melted butter and sugar. The rhythm of my life was marked by the call
of the muezzin and the school bell. I didn’t have to worry about hyenas and
lions anymore. And in the bright midday sky, sweet birds chirped. The
vultures, horrid flying vermin, were just a memory.
     “I love it here,” my sister Malika once said to me. I spit in her face. The
betrayal didn’t come as a surprise, but it hurt. It hurt badly. It was a hurt that
was overwhelming and full of anger.
    The night we went to the cinema, the old man had in mind celebrating
Malika’s tenth birthday. It had just rained and the frogs covered the earth in
a cloak of green. The silly things had emerged from their burrows to take
advantage of the sudden cool. Slick and jumpy, they basked in the last drops
of the rainy season.
    “Remember, stay in your seats. And don’t move,” our father told us.
“Especially when the lights go off. You’ll bother the others.”
    “All right, Father,” my sister said. I nodded slightly.
    “There’s nothing to be afraid of, but if you disobey you’ll get a taste of
my karbaash.”
    The karbaash—we’d heard about that. It may have been Hajiedda
Fardosa herself who put us on guard. A karbaash was a whip used for
donkeys.
    We entered the theater. And we sat down, Malika and I, as we’d been
instructed. Then I suddenly felt a tug on one of my braids. My heart
jumped.
    “Ow,” I said. It was Sultana Patel, my Indian classmate, sitting behind
me. There were lots of Indians in Magalo.
    “Don’t you know I’m with my father? If you make me yell you’ll get
me in trouble. We have to be quiet, you know!”
    “I’m not dumb,” she replied. “I saw him get up. And what’s the big deal
if you talk to me? The movie hasn’t started yet.”
    I froze. I wondered if it was a good idea to explain to my new friend
that I didn’t know what was going to happen in the room. What was a
movie? And how could you tell when it started?
    I was embarrassed. I had so many questions I wanted to ask Sultana, so
pretty and kind, my only friend. But I didn’t want her to laugh at me.
Discover my ignorance. “Have you seen the Maciste movies?”
    “No, you?”
    “Yeah,” she replied. “They’re boring though. There’s a guy, the star,
who thinks about nothing but battle, from start to finish. No love scenes,
kisses, pretty clothes ... Of course, I love Nadira. She dances a lot. I learn a
new step from every one of her movies.”
    “Oh,” I remarked as if I had understood. I was hopeless. I had to get out
of the conversation, as quickly as possible.
    “Promise you’ll teach me to dance.” My tone was peremptory.
    “Promise,” she murmured. I looked at her.
    She was beautiful.
    Her mother had gathered her long silky hair into a bun, which she’d
decorated with a garland of flowers. The white petals reflected the colorful
bundle of the sari that Sultana wore with elegance and ease. It was the first
time I’d seen her in a sari. At school we wore uniforms: pants and white
shirts. But now we were at the cinema and Sultana looked beautiful.
    I felt so ugly.
    I looked at myself and sadly noticed how monotone I was. Scruffy
braids, a potato sack as my only good clothes, half-broken clogs that were a
humiliating sight. I was as dingy as a defective lamp.
    Despite everything Sultana smiled at me, as if she really liked me.
    “Okay, we’ll start with a few steps.” Then her smile faded. “Hey, your
dad is coming. We’ll talk about it at school, sister.”
    We were partners in crime, true friends. I was happy, but my nerves
didn’t go away.
    The movie was coming and I had no idea what a movie was.
    The lights in the theater went out. My father, with his long, henna-red
beard, turned and said to me, “Remember, don’t get up for any reason. And
you’ll be in trouble if you wet your pants.”
    Dark. Then in succession the sea, a sunset, music so loud it hurt my
ears, words bigger than in the textbooks at school and a sense of
anticipation that shook my soul. It was the first time I’d ever seen the sunset
without the muezzin calling us to the Maghrib prayer. That plastic sunset
almost seemed sacrilegious. Born of the son of Satan. I was frightened. I
looked at my father and Malika. But they seemed immune to the terror that
was consuming me inside, entranced by the words that ran before our eyes.
    Then the voice came. It was Italian but at the time I wasn’t very familiar
with the language. But I was able to understand that long ago someone
called Ulysses had tricked a sorceress called Circe—what a pretty name!
There were unusual names going around at school too. There was a Mario
in our class and a Ginevra. Skin pink like the pulp of a ripe grapefruit. Red
like watermelon when the teacher called on them. Ginevra and Mario often
changed colors. Sometimes they were green, especially when they caught
cold, or white, when they were really startled. They were funny, with their
rainbow. And unlucky. Unlike me, who was always brown.
    Sultana was brown too, but not as dark. Sometimes she changed color
too. Mario and Ginevra more, though.
    As I was lost in these thoughts, a woman in a blue dress appeared on the
screen, on some kind of strange boat very different from the ones I had seen
in Magalo. The woman seemed to be wearing a kind of sari. But her
shoulders were covered by a light veil, much like the garbasaar our Somali
women wear. But that blue-clad figure had just appeared when the scene
changed. No longer the sea, but a gloomy, dark place like one of my
nightmares where the vultures devoured my goats. I closed my eyes for a
while and it felt like an eternity. When I opened them again there was the
woman in blue with two men next to her. One was nearly naked. He had a
leopard-print cloth covering his privates and lots of muscles he showed off
very proudly. To his left, there was a strange white man with stuff all over
his face and body.
    I wondered if Maciste, that blond in the loincloth, at the end of this
thing everyone called a movie, would come out of the screen to greet us.
    To me, that night, all that fiction seemed a reality. But a reality that was
better than my present one.
    I don’t know when it happened, but as the story went on and the
characters multiplied, my fear began to fade.
    By the time the movie was halfway through I was completely won over.
That night I didn’t dream of the bush. No goats, no mama, no rains, no
vultures. There was just Maciste to soothe me. His hair blond like the
horizon.
    I slept soundly.
    And Magalo no longer seemed like such a horrible place.
                                   14
                         TALKING-TO

Adua, come here, now. Don’t make me lose my patience. What’s the
meaning of this? Come on, out with it. Why am I sending you to school,
eh? To read this junk? What is this? Come on, answer! I’ll tell you what it
is: crap! It’s a photo novel, paper full of foolishness. Love is nonsense.
Love, Adua, doesn’t exist, better get it in your head now. Don’t be like your
fool of a mother Asha the Rash, she really believed in love. She called her
outbursts love and disgraced us all by dying. The neighbors say I killed her
by leaving her alone while she was pregnant. They say she died of love, of
love for me.
    Have you ever heard such colossal nonsense? Dying for love, as if that
were possible. She died, your mother, because she was a fool, to spite me. I
won’t have you, my daughter, go down the same road to perdition. Get all
your photo novels and bring them to me. We’ll burn them. We’ll make a
nice bonfire. That way you’ll see what happens with love. Love, my child,
always goes up in smoke.
                                    15
                               ZOPPE

“Maria, come out, I love you!” “Maria, I worship you!” “Maria, you’re
gorgeous!” “Sing me something, Maria! Please, sing me something. I left
my girl back at home and I’m homesick.”
     “Maria, will there really be war?”
     “Maria, bless me in case I die, I’ll die happy thinking of you!”
     Zoppe couldn’t understand the gaal. They were all huddled at the
steamship landing to see that woman decked out in the Italian flag, greeting
the legionnaires about to leave for East Africa.
     “The war is coming soon,” said a soldier on his right.
     “And Maria Uva is going to boost our spirits for all the hardships we’ll
have to face.”
     Zoppe’s desire to run from that landing was strong. What did he have to
do with those pink people and their dirty colonial war?
     Avenge Adua, stand on the side of the empire, make way for the virility
of Rome ... He pissed on that propaganda.
     All he wanted from the Italians was the money to buy a big house in
Skuraran for his Asha.
     Everything else was of no consequence to him.
     “What am I doing here?” Zoppe asked himself, watching the throng of
Italians grow on the unsteady steamship landing. The Italians clamored,
waving their hands, sending their enamored sighs toward the bare cliffside.
     Oh, Maria, love me, take me, hold me, kiss me, squeeze me, smother
me. Pray for us sinners, Maria, now and in the hour of our death.
     Amen.
                                        .
    Zoppe was hot and his head was fuming. Getting all worked up over
some whore, especially one who was pudgy and plain. That Maria Uva
must have had some advantage. Maybe she earned money from these shows
for the troops, or was even the kept woman of some big fish in the regime.
    Meanwhile, the clamor continued.
    The soldiers confused their hard-ons with the old catechism lessons
they’d learned by heart as children.
    And any Maria Uva would rise up in their hearts as if she were the
Virgin Mary in the flesh. A sister, a mother, a wife, a goddess.
    Maskiin ... Zoppe thought. Poor kids. Was this how Italy betrayed its
youth?
    Zoppe felt his breath falter on that landing heavy with sighs. The
pungent odor of cheap cologne combined with the soldiers’ smelly armpits
was making him woozy.
    Maria, Maria, Maria ...
    Come out, love, sing for us, blessed are you among women. Was
bringing out some hairy old cunt all it took to convince them that Benito
Mussolini’s war was good and just?

                                        .
    When Maria Uva appeared on the rocks, the cries of the worked up men
drowned out the sound of the sea. A wave of repressed manhood crashed
over the bulkheads and every surface was bathed in desire. Maria Uva’s
voice was shrill, high, almost irritating. But for those little soldiers the show
was paradise.
    It was in that moment of general captivation that Rebecca appeared to
Zoppe.
    The vision was clear. There was Rebecca, and she was holding her little
girl’s stuffed bear.
    “I didn’t think you would cross the sea,” Zoppe said. “I thought I
wouldn’t dream of you anymore.”
    “How are you?”
    “I don’t know.”
    The vision started growing dimmer and Rebecca’s face less clear.
    “Atrocious news is coming,” she merely said. “My husband minimizes
it, almost doesn’t notice. He keeps talking about his father who died
fighting in Vittorio Veneto, his uncle Nathan’s medal of honor. He’s a
nationalist, my Davide. Just the other day he told me, ‘If Mussolini goes to
war with the Abyssinians, it would be nice to enlist and go to East Africa.’”
    “There’s money in this war.”
    “But don’t you feel pity for your people? Don’t you feel pity for the
deaths it will cause?”
    “Money is the only thing that really counts in this life. You can’t wipe
your behind with pity and I need to get married. There’s a woman waiting
for me down in my country.”
    “A woman? Really?”
    “If I gather up the money I’m hoping to, then yes, there will be a
woman.”
    “Davide told me that we could have a plot of land there just for us, even
servants.”
    Rebecca pulled her knees to her chest. In an instant, she disappeared.
She would never come back again.

                                      .
   Zoppe touched his head, fingering the folds of the turban that Count
Anselmi made him wear.
   “Ah, bravo Zoppe, look at you, you’re a vision. That blue turban gives
you class. My mother, rest her soul, was English, my father, Count
Ludovico Anselmi, met her during one of his trips to India. She and her
family were in the retinue of the ambassador to the greatest empire on earth.
There, my parents admired the class of Indian soldiers with blue turbans.”
     The British Empire, that’s all Count Celestino Anselmi talked about. It
was his great obsession.
     “Italy deserves one just like it,” he went around saying in every drawing
room. “We’re the ones, after all, who gave the world Augustus. It’s up to us
to civilize the savages, we’re the ones who must bear this heavy burden.”
     Despite the imperial conceit that made him unpalatable at times, Count
Anselmi was the best employer Zoppe could have had in those
circumstances.
     He was a delicate creature, Count Anselmi, of medium build, with a
pearl-gray face. Long hands, thin fingers, ideal for the piano. His straw-
colored hair clashed with the dark hair on his arms and his full brown
eyebrows. Zoppe suspected that the count manipulated more than one
aspect of his body. He was so feminine, polished, evanescent.
     It was in Tivoli, at an eighteenth century estate, where the count had
received him for the first time two months before.
     Zoppe was stunned by all that wealth. Rhinoceros horns and Murano
glass, fabrics from Goa and furs from Kazakhstan, Turkish kilims and
Persian rugs, miniatures depicting emperors in erotic poses and bound
volumes on the holy British Academy.
     Next to the rhinoceros horns, Zoppe noticed a stuffed buffalo head. On
its face there was almost a sneer of satisfaction.
     The room had a pungent odor, like sweaty bodies. Zoppe felt nauseated.
Past orgasms and cries of terror resounded in his ears. What had gone on in
that house? If he could, he would have run away that instant. But he was no
longer free to do anything. The count, with his benevolent air, had bought
him. Now Zoppe was his. If he wanted to return to Magalo, if he wanted to
see Asha the Rash’s beautiful eyes again, he had to get in line.
     “Do you know how to dance?” the count asked, starting a pas de deux.
“Ah, silly me, you must practice savage dances where you come from.” His
words had a mix of arrogance and prurience. “Those dances where you’re
all naked and thrashing around. Like snakes, you know what I mean.”
     “We don’t dance,” Zoppe said. “I’ve never seen anyone in my family
dance.”
    “If affairs of state didn’t summon me to higher duties, I’d stay here and
dance out my most extreme fantasies. But now I’m thirsty, we need water.”
    He picked up and rang the bell.
    “Teodoro, there you are finally. Bring us a carafe of cold water, I’m
dying. Be quick.”
    The count was pale and not even two glasses of water brought back his
color. Zoppe had the impression he was trembling. The count pulled a blue
vial out of his pants pocket, brought it to his nose and sniffed hard.
    “Listen to me, Zoppe, I pulled you out of trouble because I’m good and
you can be of use to me. Show me your tongue.”
    Zoppe obeyed. By then that was all he knew how to do.
    “What a nice, thick, red tongue. Mmm ... I like it. It’ll be useful in
Africa, and if it proves itself, it will be well compensated. Count Anselmi is
generous.”
                                      16
                                  ADUA

I feel so tired. My face in pieces.
     I feel so tired. My eyes swollen. I feel so tired. My back broken.
     I want a shower, a pillow, a dream.
     But at home my little Titanic is sulking. I don’t have the courage to go
back. We had a fight, my little elephant.
     He and I always got along. Always sweet words between us. Always
affectionate. But today this fight, and I’m really not used to it. I’m a softie. I
love sinking my hands in my man’s spongy, curly hair. I fall asleep there
and I feel younger, with more energy.
     But today he didn’t let me anywhere near his head. “Leave me alone,”
he said.
     He was surly, hostile.
     That cowardly boy I saved from the street is now rebelling against me. I
should have let him rot on Via Giolitti with that cheap gin he bought from
the Bangladeshi for some spare change. Toxic hooch that would have
wrecked his arteries and his breath. I should have left him there at Termini
station, at the mercy of the elements and the skinheads. At least now I
wouldn’t have to put up with his sulking.
     But my little Titanic is under my protection now. I am his armor. It’s my
money that protects him from the elements and the skinheads. He has a roof
over his head, a belly that’s always full, and even time to chitchat with his
little friends who have found refuge in Northern Europe. I’m sure he’s there
all day writing “darling” or “my love.” He’s glued to Facebook. He sits at
the computer spying on the lives of others. And these other people are
always young women. Their names are Howa, Halima, Habshiro, Anisa.
They live in places where Somalis can count on subsidies and housing on
the state’s dime. And now that every day my little husband sends his insipid
declarations of love to Norway, Finland, Great Britain, Sweden ... damned
Sweden. I have the impression there’s a girl there he really likes. Some
Zahra, I think it is. Every time I ask him, “Who are these girls?” he hastily
replies, “Cousins.”
     I’ve forgiven him these virtual distractions. I know he’s going to leave
me sooner or later anyway. I know our union is temporary. I’m old, after all.
I have skin like a checkerboard and it’s not like I feel like having sex all
that much at my age. He wants me to take it in my mouth ... I feel so dirty
telling you ... but that’s what he wants ... and, you know, I try to do it. But I
always get horrible neck aches. I do it to make him happy. Plus it’s the only
thing like that he asks of me. Other than that it’s him making me happy. But
today he got all sulky and I can’t stand it.
     You know what we fought about, my little elephant? He saw my movie.
Yes, the one movie I made.
     It was showing on one of those regional channels with a strange name.
He saw the whole thing. From the first frame to the last.
     He saw me running naked on the golden sand at Capocotta, he saw
when Aldo de Luigi put his hands on my butt, he saw me making out with
Nick Tonno in a 1953 Chrysler and he also saw what my privates looked
like then. Yes, he saw everything.
     Now he has all my kisses and moans imprinted on his mind, and he too
was sucked into my headlong expressions of love dubbed at the Via
Margutta studio. They gave me a languid, honeyed voice for the movie.
“Yours is too harsh,” the director told me. Then he added, “If it’s dubbed,
your sacred body will get the drawl it needs to make every man in the world
go head over heels.” I nodded like a spring, a forced yes I didn’t
understand.
     Just standing there in front of a movie camera like Rita Hayworth
seemed incredible. What mattered was being a diva, the adrenaline, wanting
immortality more than anything else.
    I wanted to explain to my sweet little Titanic, to my little suckling
husband, that I was young then, inexperienced, lost in my celluloid dreams
and so alone. I wanted to explain to him what my life was like then. That of
course his had been hard, and I understood that it had been difficult to
escape from desert marauders and sea junkers, but mine too, as far as
difficulty goes, was no joke.
    I wanted to tell him how I used to be. How I had imagined my future
self. The things I’d wanted for myself when I was younger.
    But as usual he didn’t let me talk.
    He sealed my mouth with his own shouting.
    And then he finished with the word sharmutta, whore. My heart was
pounding. I was afraid I was going to burst from pain right there in front of
that boy.
    I pulled myself together and threw a pan at him. Then he started sulking
again.
    Him judging me. I wanted to strangle him.
                                   17
                         TALKING-TO

Are you crying, Adua? Do you dishonor me like that? Good girls never cry.
Did you see your sister Malika? She didn’t even shed one tear, and you,
what are you doing now?
     Trying to drown me? Did you expect just a tiny cut, Adua? Don’t make
all this fuss, come on now, you’re irritating me. Aunt Fardosa called the
best midwife to do your gudniinka. Now you’re free, Adua, just think about
that. You don’t have that damned clitoris that makes all women dirty. Snip,
it’s gone, finally! Thanks be to God. The pain will pass. The pain is
momentary. Whereas the joy of this liberation, Adua, endures.
     Later, you will have only the happiness of being pure, finally closed as
God commands. Your sex won’t dangle anymore, Adua. It’s beautiful to be
pure. A good thing. The best. Think what a nice life you’ll have without
that nasty knocker hanging obscenely between your legs, as if you were a
man. I’ve seen women with it, and I’ll tell you, it’s not a pretty sight.
They’re repulsive, they’re hungry for flesh, violent. Noisy. You’ve been
spared, Adua, from this shame. Now you’re closed, clean, beautiful. You’re
like my mother, like my mother’s mother, and like all the women worthy of
esteem in this big family of ours. Your mother, Asha the Rash, that fool,
was against the practice, imagine. She said, “No one will touch my
daughter, no one will infibulate her.” Luckily she’s dead. And now you’re
saved, closed, without that filthy clitoris reminding you you’re a woman.
Now nothing will distract you. You’ll get a good degree and then I’ll give
you away to the best of men. When you’re older you’ll thank me.
                                    18
                               ZOPPE

Addis Ababa was a puzzle of worlds in a yard of cloth.
     Addis was a carnation in bloom, a happy girl, a proud Oromo standing
tall. A whore like few others, Addis Ababa.
     On the one hand, it kneeled before its emperor; on the other it conspired
his ruin.
     The city was teeming with spies like never before. Mercenaries, thugs
and suspicious faces were everywhere.
     Everywhere, signs of war and imminent catastrophe.
     “You took your time getting here,” said a European who Zoppe gathered
was the French owner of the hotel where the count was to take up residence.
     The man had a long black mustache and very thick eyebrows. His
hooked nose towered over a pink face bloated with wine. He had very long
arms and they made Zoppe think of the little octopuses he used to find half-
dead on the seashore back in Magalo.
     “Pardon my lateness. Africa is so slow,” Count Anselmi replied in
French, breaking out in boisterous laughter.
     The man appreciated the quip and laughed too. “I brought two
calashes,” he said, interrupting himself. “We’ll put your baggage in the first
and you in the second. My donkeys and Arabs will take you all to your
destination, à La Douce France.”
     And with that he whistled at two olive-skinned men with long beards
and pristine white jelabiyad. “Faruk, Karim, load the gentlemen’s luggage.”
     And then turning to his guests: “Arabs are cheap and they’re very
efficient, not like those lazy Abyssinians.”
     Zoppe was not allowed to ride in the carriage. He had to follow on foot,
with his own two bundles on his shoulders.
     He felt his feet sink with every step. It had just rained and the city was
an endless expanse of mud. Zoppe noticed movement in the streets. A
strange tumult mixed with the acrid stench of fear. Everywhere were
makeshift trenches and military boots riddled with holes.
     “There’ll be war just like the papers say, you know?” the Frenchman
said with a certain enthusiasm. “But the Italians can relax. France won’t get
in the way of Benito Mussolini’s imperial plans. We have Tunisia and
they’ll get Ethiopia. Seems like a fair deal, wouldn’t you say?”
     Count Anselmi didn’t reply.
     He didn’t want to reveal himself. He just said, “Oh, Addis Ababa is so
cold in the morning, I wasn’t expecting that,” and shifted the conversation
to meteorological matters.
     Zoppe looked at the city. Addis Ababa had changed so much since the
last time he’d seen it. More modern, angrier in parts.
     Addis was so different from Magalo. It was different from Mogadishu
too. There was no sea to soothe you and the sky seemed like it was about to
squash the residents with its destructive fury. Nature was not kind in Addis
Ababa and even the air was hostile. Zoppe felt the cold breath of the
highlands hit him square in the face. He shivered. And his eyes teared up.
Addis Ababa always put you to the test. But as his father, Haji Safar, always
said, that city too, so seemingly detached, had a heart that cradled the
dreams of babes on stormy nights. When he was little, his father often
dragged him to Addis Ababa. Haji Safar was almost as respected there as in
Magalo. People smiled at him on the street and women slipped coffee beans
in the wide pockets of his tunic. Haji Safar took those beans and chewed on
them with gusto. It was wonderful to see his father’s face in those moments.
It was a round, full face, so different from his own. Zoppe was thin, long,
almost skeletal. And he didn’t have his father’s proud gait; he limped
awkwardly beside him, dragging one foot behind the other through that
disgusting swamp.
    “I like your servant,” the Frenchman said. “First time I’ve seen a Negro,
one of these Somalis, with a blue turban.”
    “Negros are outlandish, didn’t you know?” Count Anselmi replied,
giving the Frenchman a knowing wink.
    The two Europeans laughed. Zoppe was humiliated.

                                      .
     And La Douce France wasn’t all that sweet.
     It was on a busy street where the nauseating odor of the hides and meats
at the nearby market forced the guests to stay in their rooms with the
windows closed for most of the morning. Count Anselmi was lucky. His
room overlooked a side street where the only smell that came through was
the coffee prepared by the neighborhood women. The true loser in the
matter was Civa. Nothing but squawks and stink in his room.
     Zoppe was arranging, for the umpteenth time in recent days, the young
man’s belongings in a red trunk when Civa called him with a rather excited
“Hey, hey!”
     “Sir,” Zoppe replied. It bothered him to call him that, but it had been a
strict order from Count Anselmi.
     “You see that window down there? They say there’s one of those ladies
down there. You know, those pretty ladies of the night ... the ones ... you
know, on the postcards.”
     “Whores, yes, I know, master.”
     “Clearly, Zoppe. Don’t be so vulgar.”
     “But sir, that’s what they are. I didn’t make them take up that trade.”
     “You’re a puritan, Zoppe. A puritan Negro, can you believe the oddities
I keep seeing.”
     Zoppe didn’t reply.
     Who knows what Haji Safar would have said. His father hadn’t
appeared in his visions for a while now.
     Not even the Limentanis appeared in his dreams anymore. It was as if
Addis Ababa and its hectic life had stripped him of all his affections.
      Zoppe found himself surrounded by strangers. With no one to confide
in.
     And since he’d arrived in Addis Ababa his tongue had been infected. It
was swollen, sore, and had strange yellow spots on the tip. He’d even spit
blood that morning.
     He had tried to heal it by chewing the gingerroot he always carried in
his pocket. But the infection didn’t cease to torment him.
     His head hurt too. He couldn’t stand the claustrophobic feeling of those
overstuffed rooms. That art deco ostentation didn’t go well with the armies
of termites that attacked European-style furnishings.
     Everything was nibbled away. Everything in that strange hotel was half
off.
     Even the guests.
     They were almost all journalists looking for a scoop in that land that
would soon be swept up by a colonial war. Mussolini—and it wasn’t a
secret to anyone—had ordered that the conflict was to begin before German
rearmament was completed. If he wanted to attack Ethiopia, the Duce had
to do it sometime that year.
     Only the journalists had never covered an actual war.
     Count Anselmi called them “the circus,” and Zoppe couldn’t help but
agree with his ambiguous master’s definition.
     Armed with telescopes, first aid kits, tan safari jackets, and gas masks,
the circus tried desperately not to appear too ridiculous before the eyes of
their own consciences.
     They ranged from Communist fans of the Negus to ridiculous
Americans in shorts and suspenders. In the morning they met for breakfast
with bags under their eyes from bad digestion and cheap alcohol, asking
one another: “So what shall we tell our readers today?” They scratched their
heads, sipping bitter Ethiopian coffee and looking hopeless. “I can’t
describe the usual parade of the Ras’s warriors, I put that out last week.”
Someone else in the back of the room: “Luckily in Germany they still go
wild over primitive scenes.”
     “Hey,” chimed in one of the rare women in that caravan. “Has anyone
ever tried to describe these people’s food? They’re so caveman-like, they
still eat with their hands.”
     Zoppe, the few times he’d been granted access to the breakfast room,
had wondered why those journalists didn’t simply tell their readers about
the preparations for war.
     Addis Ababa was in ferment. The city was fatefully preparing for
defense, and every spot, even the holy Cathedral of St. George, had become
a trench. In order to keep his people’s spirits high, Haile Selassie organized
parade after parade. And to show how industrious Ethiopia was, he had
foreigners taken around to its hospitals, its prisons, its schools.
     “Hey, Zoppe, look.” It was Civa calling him back to the present,
pointing out the prostitute’s window all happy. “She pulled up the curtain,
maybe she’s free.”
     “I wouldn’t if I were you.”
     “But ... I’m dying to lie with a beautiful Abyssinian. In Rome I saw
certain little photos that got me tempted. They say their cunts are huge and
you get lost inside them. Ah, it must be a wonderful sensation,” and he
began to whistle.
     Then suddenly the young woman looked out the window and upon
seeing Civa started waving her hands in greeting. She was dressed in white
and had an unusual dark veil around her head.
     “But ... but ...” Civa stammered.
     “That’s what I wanted to warn you about. Not what you expected, is it?”
“But ... her face ...” the young Italian said, dismayed.
     “She’s had smallpox. It happens. Accept it. Now get away from there. I
think that’s been enough of a lesson for today.”
     Zoppe brusquely lowered the shutters.
                                    19
                                 ADUA

During our history lesson I was called into the headmaster’s office.
     That had never happened before.
     I hadn’t done anything wrong, at least not that I could recall.
     It was a hot day in 1976. I think it was November. In Magalo, the sun
blazed. Rain, a distant memory. “There will be terrible shortages,” the
elders said. My legs trembled.
     Drops of sweat beaded on my oval face. I looked right at the
headmaster. A plea in my eyes: “Be quick.” But the headmaster didn’t
speak, he just looked at me and shook his head. Then he began fiddling
with a pen and paper. He made a few doodles. I didn’t look away, it was as
if I was frozen. I was supposed to look at the floor, show more humility. But
my eyes locked with his. He had strange green eyes. I held my breath.
     “Your father has been arrested,” he said solemnly. I looked down. Now
there was really no sense in staring at the headmaster. I didn’t want to see
the expression of triumph on his face. The headmaster hated my father. All
the men in Siad Barre’s new regime did.
     My father didn’t hide his aversion to the dictator or to the new direction
Somali politics had taken. “These Communists will lead us to ruin,” he kept
saying. Hajiedda Fardosa begged him to keep quiet. But he continued to
speak out. “Trash,” he’d say, and let out a big wad of spit in demonstration
of all his contempt.
     “Don’t you think of your daughters?” Hajiedda Fardosa asked him.
“Don’t you think about their future? They’ll be the ones to pay if you keep
acting this way.”
    “They can handle it. They’re big now. I can’t think about them. It’s my
conscience.”
    I’d been expecting the arrest. We all had. I stood there, silent, waiting to
be dismissed. But the headmaster didn’t let me go. He kept playing with his
pen, with his doodles.
    “Your father,” he said, again breaking the bitter silence, “has been
accused of insubordination. It’s a very serious charge.” I nodded, tired of
the bad comedy. “Nothing to say?”
    I was berated, and I quickly mustered: “Yes, Headmaster, it’s a very
serious charge.” What was I supposed to do? Apologize? Kneel at his feet?
Did he expect me to tear my hair out? What did he want? Then he looked at
me with his unmoving eyes, black and empty.
    “I’ll be keeping an eye on you. You know what they say, like father, like
daughter.” I was dismissed and I returned to class. No one asked me why
the headmaster had called me in. No one talked to me after class, not even
Muna Kinky-Hair, my dearest friend at the time. Not even you, Muna, will
talk to me anymore? You, who have been outcast by everybody because
you’re a nappy-headed jeerer? You, who are considered to be from a lower
caste, a Bantu Somali with a big nose and wide backside? Even you, Muna,
would betray me like that? I had suddenly become a pariah. Someone to
avoid.
    When I got back home, there was Hajiedda Fardosa with a face more
glum than usual and yellow cheeks that clearly attested to the failing state
of her liver. “We can see him this afternoon,” she told me. Malika didn’t
come along. She wasn’t well. She had thrown up, unable to take the news. I
didn’t feel sorry for her. You could never count on Malika, not even in a
time of need.
    The temporary detention center was in the Affissione Est district. Far
from home. Hajiedda Fardosa and I walked for kilometers between twigs
and hot sand. There was no sea there. The landscape was dominated by the
lunar solitude of the African periphery. It went through your eyes and
affronted your heart. Once we arrived we waited at a green gate for an hour.
Hajiedda Fardosa had sandy feet and dirty nails. I stood off to the side with
my legs crossed. I looked at my hands. I was harboring the biggest of
secrets. The week before, thanks to Omar Genale, I had met some Italians.
Omar Genale. What a character! He was fat when no one else in Somalia
was. Now everyone is fat, especially those of us in the diaspora like me.
They drown their homesickness in heaps of mustard and fried meat. But
during my teenage years, Omar was the only fat one in the city. He had a
pointy mustache, a flat chin, piggish eyes and sweet little dimples like a
baby Jesus. He always had a bunch of smiles handy, especially “for big
beauties like you, Adua.” The prematurely aged child really made me
laugh. His walk, I remember, was especially funny. He scampered on his
toes like a rabbit. But his was a hop full of fat, a tired hop from the notable
bulk of flab that he was carrying.
     Omar trafficked in all sorts of items. You wanted butter and he had it
brought directly from Nairobi. French cigarettes, there they were. Italian
magazines, no need to even ask. Housewives relied on him for flour. And
big beauties like me asked him for contraband cassette tapes. Gianni
Morandi, Jackson 5, Stevie Wonder, Omar had everything. He knew how to
navigate the intricate network of illegal trade. No one imagined that such a
big, heavy man could go as light as a dragonfly between the narrow clefts
of a despotic regime. He was good at his job, Omar. It wasn’t particularly
commendable, but it was what a depleted city like Magalo needed. “Good
job, Omar,” the Italians told him. “You brought us the right girl.” Someone
else in the group: “She has nice legs, this Negro girl.” Naturally he was
compensated. And he was given the task of taking me to the airport on the
agreedupon date. “Bring her to us; the rest, the exit documents, we’ll take
care of that.” And so the deal was sealed. More money was promised to
Omar Genale. And I literally felt like I was in seventh heaven. They were
Italian, they wanted to make movies, they would turn me into a Marilyn and
I’d leave that sewer Magalo forever.
     But now I was standing at a green gate with my legs crossed waiting to
visit my arrested father in jail. Italy was still too far away. A strong wind
began to ruffle our clothes. Sand blew into our eyes, Hajiedda Fardosa
teared up. I squeezed my eyes shut as hard as I could. Meanwhile, my mind
wandered. What would I say to him once we were inside? We never talked.
What did he expect me to do? I didn’t know how to love him.
     And he didn’t know how to love me. And meanwhile, the wind kept
pounding us. It hit hard.
     I squeezed my eyes shut again. When they opened the green gate I
almost didn’t notice. Hajiedda Fardosa tugged me and I straightened up like
a newly bloomed flower. In front of me was a man in uniform but without a
hat. He wore glasses. He said nothing. He motioned for us to follow him.
The man was bald. He had a large, pockmarked face. A cruel face I could
have gladly done without. He put his hands on my bottom. I looked toward
Hajiedda Fardosa for support, but she was looking the other way. Blood
shot to my brain. I wrung my hands. Luckily, I thought, I was about to leave
all this behind. In three days I’ll be out of here. I already pictured myself in
Rome, a city I knew from books. In my head I recited the names of its
streets and its squares: Via Sistina, Via Giulia, Piazza di Spagna, Piazza
Navona, Via Veneto ... How wonderful! I already saw myself wrapped in a
black Givenchy dress like Audrey Hepburn, ready to climb the ladder to
success. The Italians liked me. They were going to have me make a movie.
     They would make me immortal. No more Magalo, no more troubles, no
more headmasters calling me or best friends betraying me.
     Hajiedda Fardosa and I were led into a room with turd-colored walls.
The police officer escorting us said “Wait here,” and then shot me a nasty,
mean look. It didn’t register. My imagination was elsewhere. I was in
Rome, on Via Margutta, on Via del Corso. Then a man in a trapezoidal
green uniform appeared. He introduced himself as the director of the
institution. He was nicer than the policeman, less vulgar. He had a
translucent mustache that put anyone around him in a good mood. “He’s a
stubborn one, your husband,” the director told Hajiedda Fardosa. “Talk
some sense into him and he’ll be out of here soon.”
     “I’ll try,” Hajiedda Fardosa said, biting her lip.
     Then Papa was brought in.
     He was smiling, in contrast to the atmosphere in that turd-colored room.
The blue turban he always wore was sloppily wrapped. My father was
thinner. His eyes more intense. He seemed happy. Satisfied. I looked at
Hajiedda Fardosa. She hadn’t expected that smile either. I wanted to kiss
him on the cheek. I’d never done it before. How does one kiss one’s father?
No one ever taught me. No one touched at home. Let alone kissed. I took a
step toward him. I reached out. I should at least shake his hand. A manly
gesture, one that he would understand. I took one step, two, three—then I
tripped over a chair I hadn’t noticed. I fell flat on my face. A ridiculous fall.
Like in a silent film, something out of Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton.
    Everyone laughed and the tension melted. “I have a clumsy daughter,”
my father said.
                                    20
                         TALKING-TO

I can’t stand you looking at me like that, Adua, like you’re scolding me. I’m
the father. You’re just the daughter. I can look at you that way, you can’t.
You’re nobody. Without me you wouldn’t have even been born. These are
things you would do better not to forget. And I’m sick of these questions
about your mother. What do you want to know? You mention her all the
time, muttering to yourself. You think I don’t see you trying to talk with the
shadow of that woman? You never even met Asha the Rash. You don’t even
know what her face was like. And you dare talk to her? Adua, what are you
talking to her for? You’re pathetic sometimes. I’m not a fool or blind. I see
everything you do. But that woman, no, that whore, don’t mention her name
in my presence again. She chose to die, she left us. Don’t mention her, ever.
And even if you’ve gotten big I can still beat you till your soul bleeds.
Don’t take advantage of my good heart. I haven’t beaten you for years and I
have no intention to start again now. But stop bringing her up. That woman
is nothing. Just a mistake.
                                   21
                               ZOPPE

Citrons didn’t break. They weren’t weak like the fragile papayas or soft
mangos. Citrons were warriors, their cores made of metal and their pulp
was as if covered in armor. It was a strange alchemy that kept citrons alive.
The sweet soul was in fact a defense against a rough, thick skin. That’s
what guaranteed the heavenly fruit a quiet life without any trouble. Citrons
were more resistant than lemons, harder than grapefruits. Ideal for target
practice.
    “You’ll see, brother, they’re just what we’ve been looking for.”
    Semeon was enthusiastic about his discovery. And he wouldn’t stop
singing its praises. To him, those rough citruses had the advantage of being
not too small, but not gigantic either. They were what Semeon called “the
ideal size.”
    “I saw them at the market, down at Tessa’s. They’re just right for us, my
brother, they’re perfect. Shooting at them will be like shooting right at the
temple of the Italian enemy,” Semeon told him the first time.
    And since then, Dagmawi had taken up the habit of going outside the
city to the big clearing with a big basket full of citrons.
    A basket, and a weapon hidden under his arm.
    That fruit had become the center of his existence. On the horizon, a
future as a warrior.
    Normally he went alone to the clearing. His Somali friend Zoppe had
come to see him. What a treat! He really needed someone to share his
troubles with. Since he’d started training, he was suffering. It was as if
something were eating him from the inside out. It was nice for once to have
some company, not to go down that long thorny road in solitude.
     It had been five years since they’d seen each other last. In those five
years they had become men. In those five years the responsibilities had
piled up on their shoulders.
     Zoppe sported a nice Sufi beard, though his hands remained as soft as a
young girl’s. They were hands that had never seen soil or the hard labor of
that daily back-and-forth. Dagmawi, on the other hand, knew all about it.
He had been working at the Indian emporium Mohamedally for three years,
and by now his life was organized by the packages he had to load and
unload. Flour, rice, curry, chili pepper, cumin, as well as hides, meats,
beans, eggs.
     He worked hard at Mohamedally, and from the labor his once smooth
hands were covered with little wrinkles of suffering.
     But Zoppe suffered too. You could see it in his furrowed brow and his
constantly quivering shoulders.
     Dagmawi wanted to ask his friend the reason for all his anxiety, but
decided to wait.
     Once they reached the clearing they would tell each other everything.
     “It’ll seem crazy to you, Zoppe, my friend,” he said, almost anticipating
the confession, “but these citrons are the best thing that have happened to
me in the last six months, at least ... yes, definitely the best. All I have left
to keep me from going crazy are the citrons. Zoppe, will I be capable of
killing?”
     Zoppe didn’t breathe a word. He just took a citron and bounced it off his
right hand.
     “What about your marriage? Since you wrote me you’ve been married
for about five months ... Is it possible that these citrons are better than your
woman?”
     “Yes,” Dagmawi said curtly.
     He loved Tezetà, his wife, but those citrons ... ah, those citrons ... they
were the corollary of something bigger, more absolute.
     Those citrons were the tangible proof of a man’s love for his land.
                                      .
    Zoppe had already forgotten the citrons. His soul had taken him back to
the vision he’d seen at dawn, several hours before.
    He’d barely slept that night. The cries of a wounded dog in the distance
kept him awake.
    He had asked Count Anselmi for the day off and strangely the count put
up no resistance.
    “I know you’re not going to run away anyway. You can’t. So go ahead
and enjoy a day of complete leisure.” And then, with a coy wink, continued:
“The body’s needs must be satisfied. These little Ethiopian girls are like
good wine from the hills, all it takes is a couple of glasses to tide you over
for the next ten years.”
    No point in explaining to the lecherous count that he wasn’t going to see
a woman. Not that he didn’t miss a woman’s sweet breath ... At home, as
soon as he got back, he would find Asha the Rash waiting for him. He loved
Asha. He had promised himself, under the shade of a sycamore, that he
would make her his. And Zoppe was a man of his word.
    He missed his future bride. A woman with a big backside and a
contagious laugh.
    Asha the Rash, afar indhood as the neighbors called her, because of the
thick tortoiseshell spectacles a Turkish doctor had advised her to wear.
    But that morning, the thought of Asha was swept away by a vision. A
bad vision.
    The contours of the world were jagged and opaque. His eyes teared up.
His mouth suddenly went dry. And his tongue became stiff, lifeless.
    The vision came before he left the hotel. He saw wood huts burning. He
recognized that place. He’d been there with Haji Safar on one of his trips.
His father would go there to heal children from their demons. That was how
he met Dagmawi and his family. His father had cured a friend of his from
the evil eye. And since then the two boys had been inseparable. Haji Safar
loved that town, loved those people. “Here was once the kingdom of Bilqis,
the one the gaal call the Queen of Sheba. If we exist in this world, my son,
it is because of her. That is why I often come to this foreign land. I reunite
with the spirit of the ancient queen.” Haji Safar loved that land, and he was
delighted to be able to give a little hope to those people without a future.
There, among the poor, East Africa overcame its differences. There, all
divisions were canceled out. Zoppe could have recognized that big district
out of a thousand. How much time he had spent there as a little boy,
romping in the mud with Dagmawi and little Semeon. The area was
between Sidist Kilo and the old market. There, his father was respected and
venerated. Seeing those huts burning was an immense horror for Zoppe,
who collapsed in the doorway like a rag. In the vision, everything was being
set on fire. He saw brown uniforms, taut cheekbones, onion-shaped eyes,
pink skin, black corpses.
     Then the vision, just as it came, vanished into air.
     It dissipated with the first morning light, without leaving a trace, except
in his human heart.

                                       .
     “This is the clearing, dear Zoppe. We’re here,” Dagmawi said.
     Just then a treacherous wind began bellowing from the west.
     In an instant Zoppe’s skin became hard and bluish. Everything was flat
and empty. A few shrubs here and there. A few solitary animals.
     The citrons in that lunar landscape truly looked heavenly.
     Dagmawi took one in his hand. It was yellow, oval and had a slight
bump at the peduncle. He touched it. He almost shivered. It was so much
like a woman’s nipple.
     The man began to play with the citron, rolling it from one hand to the
other. A frozen expression on his face. He was talking to the citron, coaxing
it. He wanted to understand its most recondite secrets, suck out its wisdom
before destroying it. Then he gripped it decisively and threw it into the
distance. “Nice curve,” Zoppe yelled. But Dagmawi didn’t hear him,
Dagmawi was shooting.
    A suffocating silence muffled the eardrums like silk. There were only
the citrons and their unrelenting thirst for vengeance. Everything was
deadened and soft. Only the flapping wings of the horrible marabous
clashed with the clouds in the sky. They were shrieking over some carcass
they’d scented nearby.
    Dagmawi didn’t like marabous. They were a bad omen. He had seen
many of them during work. Sometimes he came across a load of spoiled
meat and it was his job to carry it as far away as possible from the
emporium. Those beasts waited for the meat to rot, and when the first
worms came out of the carcass, they would swoop down onto what had
once been alive. Nothing scared them, not even his presence, not even his
pitchfork.
    Dagmawi looked at Zoppe. “When I have real bombs in my hand, will I
be so brave?”
    “Maybe,” Zoppe replied, doubtful.
    “The Italians are going to crush us, aren’t they?” Dagmawi insisted.
    “They have modern weapons,” Zoppe said noncommittally.
    To distract himself, Zoppe picked up a citron too. It was round, shiny,
inviting like few other things in this world. The citron reminded him of his
Asha’s curves. He started peeling it. Slowly. Then he ate it.
                                    22
                                 ADUA

“You don’t dress well.”
     So the boy whose mouth I feed said to me this morning.
     I should say, “So my husband said to me,” but as the days go by I feel
he’s less and less of a husband and more of a burden.
     I can’t seem to care about him or respect him like I used to. Besides, he
doesn’t love me anymore either. He didn’t love me when we got married, to
tell the truth, but at least he was kind, considerate. The rascal always knew
what to do with a fool like me. He played the part of the chivalrous knight
perfectly and I melted at his fake declarations of love. I knew—because I’m
not dumb—that he was never motivated by genuine feelings for me. It was
clear what attracted him was having a place to sleep, the hot soup I offered
him, more than my long-faded graces. But despite it all, I accepted that
fiction, because it was the only thing in the world that still gave me a little
warmth, a jolt of life. With him I realized at least in part my ridiculous
childhood dreams. That’s why I pretended to believe him—I did it for that
little girl from the past—and in that vulnerable state jumped into his arms
like a freezing little animal. To his credit, the little bastard has always
known how to handle me, he was always good at that. Not by chance did he
pretend to be more in love than anyone else, the most devoted of the
devoted. His eyes were so funny and false. So cheerful and deceitful. I
laughed at his efforts, but deep down I was also a little flattered. Like a
good master, I liked to see him kneel at my feet and ask for just a few
crumbs of love in return. As a magnanimous mistress I threw him what
little he needed in order to adore me. Not one ounce more or less. I was
good at measuring out my power, or what, poor stupid me, I thought was
power. And he was good at being falsely devoted to me. There were days,
especially the ones streaked with gray lines and bad omens, when he
greeted me with a brilliant smile, and if he saw I was especially tired he
happily massaged my aching feet.
    Sometimes he sang me songs full of love. “For my beauty, for my
darling,” he said.
    He would make paper flowers to frame my pretty little face.
    I laughed at these sentimentalities. I found all that teenage romanticism
ridiculous, those rose-colored thoughts that weren’t for me. And if I think
about it, they weren’t for him either. Since when did two Somalis,
especially ones with nomadic backgrounds like us, give each other treacle-
colored flowers?
    We who had known hunger, separation, suffering— what the hell were
we supposed to do with a flower?
    I told him so.
    Flowers weren’t part of our culture; he should stop with these Western
affectations copied from who knows where.
    I was harsh, so that he would be even sweeter with me. I wanted him to
soften all my asperities, cradle my wounded self, compensate for my
cultural maladjustments.
    Usually he did. But sometimes what I also heard out of his little viper
mouth was a truth I wasn’t ready to hear.
    Once, I don’t remember now if it was in the morning or afternoon, he
asked me: “When you were young, you never loved anyone, did you
Adua?” His face was completely serious. It scared me.
    I remember looking at him a little taken aback, a little offended. How
dare he judge me, this kid? How dare he hurt me with his pointed words?
Had he perhaps forgotten that I had been the one to take him off the street
and feed him?
    What did that peach-fuzzed little boy know about my youth? What did
he know about how much suffering I’d buried in my chest?
     I closed myself in a dome of silence. Pissed. Furious. But it didn’t last
long. I can never really stay mad at him. Usually it takes just one of his
little quirks to put a bright big smile back on my face.
     And that was when he, like a perfect Lancelot, would get down on one
knee before me and with hands joined on his chest, start to recite the love
poems that his poor paralytic mother had taught him one night to distract
him from the bombs falling like hailstones over their bare heads. It was
jidaal, the season that brings nothing and spares nothing, but the little boy’s
heart filled up with his mother’s chimeras as fast as a wineskin.
     Ah, how I loved those poems where valiant camel riders saved maidens
on the pasture from the insatiable ferocity of the hyenas. I saw myself in
every girl and my heart beat with every heart.
     “Recite, recite some more, little one,” I commanded. And with his clear
and sonorous voice from better days he transported me to a time before all
time, where not even dreams yet had a home.
     Now however, none of this happened any more between us. That
debauched Titanic is sprawled out in front of the TV almost all day long.
     I wonder when he’s going to leave me.
     At this point I don’t wonder if anymore, but more realistically, when.
We barely touch at all anymore.
     I think he’s had enough of my barren womb.
     His every cell, I can feel it, is pushing him forcefully to make an heir
for himself.
     Today I wondered whether the “You don’t dress well” which he shouted
cruelly in my face was none other than the beginning of our end.
     How ironic. Radiant me, today I’m dressed like a housemaid.
     I remember when I was young I brought the sun to Italy, to this crater of
illusions that swallowed me up.
     It was the twentieth century and I was the most beautiful in the land.
     Arturo Sposetti, the director of the film I starred in as the Femina
Somala, box office smash in the year of grace 1977, always told me I was
the most beautiful. Arturo had a big paunch that didn’t match his little arms,
as slender as a rachitic boy’s. No hair on his face. Smooth as a young girl.
He looked like a hippopotamus, with that sleepy air he had. He smoked a
pipe. I remember how much I liked smelling the pungent odor of tobacco
when he was nearby. He rarely laughed. He squinted like a sloth. And for
every little thing he’d slap me on the rear like a sailor. But he did it
listlessly. He contorted himself to fit the masculine role which destiny had
affixed onto him. Everything about his gestures betrayed little conviction.
     And it seemed like life didn’t interest him all that much. He’d get
excited about my Somali fabrics, though. He went crazy over my tunics.
     “That dress you’re wearing is magnificent. I want it on the movie
poster,” he told me, with that hollow smile of his.
     And sure enough I’m wearing a Somali tunic on the poster, though it’s
carefully cropped, almost up to my groin, to leave my legs exposed.
     And to make the whole thing look even more savage Arturo had me
take the photo perched on a big plastic baobab like Jane from Tarzan.
     The idea for the tree was Sissi’s. She had all the extravagant ideas.
     And in fact it was Sissi, Arturo’s wife, who had chosen me for the
movie.
     “She was the one who wanted you. And in general she was the one who
insisted on having a Somali.”
     They’d forked over quite a bit to get me a passport, a visa, an airline
ticket. And Somali customs authorities didn’t look twice. Sissi wanted me
at all costs. But in the end I cost the production very little. I thanked them
by running away from home with my best fabrics.
     I didn’t say good-bye to anyone, not even Muna Kinky-Hair, my ex-
friend. I was too afraid of last minute revelations. I didn’t want to get
caught by an enraged father and his sympathetic community. So in silence I
let myself be swallowed up by an Alitalia Boeing with a stopover in Addis
Ababa.
     “She’s gonna make us rich, this Negress,” and to celebrate, they sang
“Faccetta Nera” on the airplane—the 1930s fascist anthem about an
Abyssinian girl being taken to Rome after the invasion of Ethiopia. They
sang it to me a hundred times, shaking my long arms, asleep from the
weight of my runaway’s pack.
     “During the African campaign my father bought a wife from where
you’re from,” Sissi told me that first night on the plane. I just nodded,
waiting for the rest of a story that never came.
     Sissi never mentioned her father again.
     In general, the Sposettis didn’t talk much.
     They didn’t tell me much about the movie, to tell the truth. I knew only
that the main character was called Elo and that she was a photographer.
     “So when can I read the script?” I asked.
     I wasn’t illiterate and I couldn’t wait to read that script. But no, they
didn’t give anything away.
     And that is how for several days, weeks even, I lived in ignorance. Elo
... who are you, Elo?
     Yaad tahay?
     I wondered what sort of face I’d give her. What tone of voice. What
bearing, what gestures.
     No one had told me yet that Elo undressed completely and gave herself
away to men like a dog in heat.
     Then one night Arturo and Sissi told me everything. And they told me
crudely. It was May. Yes, May.
     It was a freezing night, a strangely freezing night for springtime in Italy.
I was dressed too lightly for the occasion. I was wearing a tunic because
Sissi had insisted so much, because she’d told me, “You have to be extra
beautiful for us tonight.” A delicate scarf covered my bare shoulders lightly.
I was shivering with cold, but I tried not to let it show too much. We were
in a seaside town near Rome, I don’t remember which; the boardwalk was
empty and the pizzeria we had come out of was closing. An insidious wind
ruffled our exposed souls and a strange light flashed in a distant window.
     “What a moon tonight, look,” Arturo said, turning to his wife.
     She didn’t reply. She just said: “Why don’t you take us to the beach
house? That way Adua can see it.”
     I was tired. I wanted to jump in bed and sleep, close my eyes and sleep
for a century or two. But Sissi terrified me and so I faked enthusiasm.
    Sissi, I realize now that some time has passed, had a cunning beauty
that could stop a too fragile heart like mine. Not because she was beautiful,
but because there was this need for control in her that was difficult to get
away from. That night her bobbed hair was tousled, she wore a casual
blouse, a pair of jeans, a burst of beads and leather laces that wrapped
around her big feet. Her face shone with an intense light and her salt-and-
pepper hair accented the intense green of her almond eyes.
    Her nose was straight, her build robust, her chest abundant, but despite
her bulk she wasn’t a fat person. Her hands were big, though her shoulders
were oddly tiny. I noted with an expert eye that she regulated this flaw with
modest shoulder pads, which gave a certain consistency to all her bodily
contradictions.
    It was she who asked me: “Are you bored?”
    “No, dear,” I said, in the meek voice I had back then.
    “Good,” she said, relieved. “We have a nice surprise for you.”
    Arturo, meanwhile, didn’t speak. He wasn’t a man of many words. He
usually grumbled and when he wasn’t busy grumbling he was smoking his
pipe.
    When we got to the beach house, they offered me a scotch. “I don’t
drink,” I said. It was true.
    “A drop won’t do you any harm, it’s a party.” I was struck again by that
fear. Sissi’s voice chilled my soul. I didn’t have the strength to tell her no. I
drank.
    And that sly pair gave me all sorts of things. Vodka, whisky, wine, gin.
Mixing in excessive amounts.
    Soon I was drunk.
    And I, who didn’t know how to say no to the people I considered my
benefactors, knocked back one after another, with an idiotic smile on my
face.
    “They took me away from that pit Magalo, they’re having me make a
movie like Marilyn, they care about me.” That’s what I thought then.
    And the more I wanted to say no, the more I knocked back those
obscene concoctions because my head refused to let go of the idea of Elo,
who was going to make me famous like Marilyn.
     “If you leave, they’ll give the part to someone else,” my head told me,
as I contemplated every tolerable sacrifice to be Marilyn.
     I knew they were after my body. I wasn’t that naïve.
     I knew sooner or later I would have to pay that tax. A friend had warned
me. “They’ll ask for your body. That’s what the Italians did with my
grandmother. I don’t think these ones are any different, you know? You just
have to figure out if you are willing to pay the price or not.”
     I would have paid anything to become Marilyn. Or at least that’s what I
thought then.
     I didn’t know that they would take everything from me. Even my
dignity. I let myself be touched, groped, smelled.
     Their hands were frenzied, their breath heavy. She gave the orders, and
he followed them.
     Then she kissed him and he squeezed my tits. It went on and on. I felt
like one big bruise.
     “We’re teaching you, Adua,” Sissi told me at one point, when I was on
the verge of passing out from exhaustion and alcohol.
     “Teaching me?” I said.
     “You’ll have to do this in the movie.”
     “In the movie?”
     “You’re awkward. Hesitant. We’ve studied you. You’ve never been
touched by a man, have you, Adua?”
     I was plastered. I couldn’t even respond. I wanted to scream. But I was
too weak. Too weak. I wonder if this had happened to Marilyn too.
     Marilyn, so sweet and so jaded. Urban legend had it that once she got a
star on her dressing room door she exclaimed, laughing indecorously: “Now
I’ll only do it with the ones I want to.” No more fellatio to land an audition,
no more quickies in the elevator to reach a certain director.
     Marilyn had earned her place in the star system. And me?
     Would I have the guts to go from fellatio to fellatio to reach my dream?
I didn’t know what my answer was. I was too drunk.
    And that was when, as I was lost in my thoughts, she ordered him:
“Now undress her, Arturo!” He looked at me sidelong, hollowly
embarrassed, and with a flick undid the tie on my tunic.
    And for the first time I was naked in front of my director.
    “Arturo, she’s yours, do whatever you want with her,” Sissi said in a
hard military voice that froze my blood. And that was when Arturo noticed
the stitches.
    “This one is all closed up down there,” he told his wife.
    “Closed?”
    “Yeah, it’s like she’s run through with barbed wire.”
    “What are you talking about, Arturo?” And she too, who had mostly
limited herself to giving orders from the feather couch, jumped up on the
bed, all disheveled, to see the strange barbed wire that their Somali girl had
in that so delicate spot.
    “Adua, what did they do to you down there?” I didn’t respond. I was so
sleepy. “Answer, you twit. What did they do to you down here?” I didn’t
respond. I didn’t have the strength.
    I barely heard their words.
    That’s when Sissi slapped me, one, two, three times. “Listen, I repeat,
what did they do to you down there, fool?”
    And that’s when I said: “They do it to all the girls in my country. They
cut our siil, the part that hangs down. They cut off other stuff down there
too. Of course it hurts, but then you get a bunch of gifts and it’s nice. I got a
shell. Then they sew us up. That way we remain pure, we’re virgins, and we
stay that way until our wedding day, when someone loves us and opens us
up with his love,” I replied with a whimper.
    “Love?” she rebuked. “What a useless word.”
    “You don’t need love, stupid. We can open you up with a pair of
scissors. And then finally Arturo will be able to taste you.”
    Scissors?
    Did she say scissors?
    I tried to wriggle away ... to beg them. But there were two of them, they
were stronger than me, and also more lucid.
    And that’s how on that strange May night I was deflowered by a pair of
scissors. I wonder if the same thing happened to Marilyn.
    I wonder ...
                                   23
                         TALKING-TO

Where did you find that picture? Do you look through my stuff, Adua? And
what do you mean you want an explanation?
    I won’t give you any explanation and I won’t tell you who those white
people in the photo are either. I can tell what you’re trying to do.
    I realize that you doubt my being a patriot and a nationalist. You think
I’m acting.
    Your mother thought the same thing. Always questioning me, not taking
me at my word. It’s like I can still hear your silly mother. “Dear, why don’t
you tell me the truth? Everyone worked with the whites during that time
anyway.” She thought I was a traitor, a bad person. She didn’t love me, your
mother. She thought the worst of me. And then she would whine and beg
for some truth and it bothered me so much when she said it was all the same
to her, it didn’t matter. How could it not matter? There’s a big difference
between betraying your country and fighting for it. But then your mother
said “I love you” and to her those words settled everything. She was a silly
goose, a dupe, a fool. And headstrong too. Always sitting there asking me
about my past, the whites, the wars I went through.
    She was a nosy pain in the neck. And now you’re doing the same thing?
You women, you’re impossible. Creatures from hell. I can’t stand you.
                                     24
                                ZOPPE

The man had kind eyes, a long beard and big ears like an elephant’s.
     The man was bent over big sheets of paper all day. He spent hours
sketching the world. He drew trees, butterflies, gnats, girls. His realm was
the courtyard of the Hotel La Douce France; he wasn’t interested in touring
like the other guests. There was no agitation in his movements. Zoppe
envied him. He too would have liked to sit there doing nothing. Instead he
had to run all over Addis Ababa with Count Anselmi. Lately, their days had
become frenetic. And Zoppe’s tongue had dried up in his throat from
translating. He translated, but he lost the sense of the words. It was as if his
thoughts were floating away from him in a storm cloud. But the count had
fallen ill that day. “My head is spinning,” he’d said that morning. “I hope
it’s not a fever; I’m going to lie down for a while.” Zoppe was pleased. He
couldn’t stand any more running around muddy Addis in his old shoes and
he hoped the fever would last as long as possible. That’s how he found
himself in the courtyard with the elephant-eared man that strange morning.
     He looked at him as if for the first time.
     There was something so familiar in the figure bent over the sketch
paper. As if they’d already met. His skin was a little yellow. Covered with
strange brown spots and a thick layer of pink dust that Zoppe couldn’t quite
explain. He couldn’t figure out where the strange man came from either. It
was like he had emerged from the depths of some crater. There was
something ancient about him and at the same time familiar.
     The man looked at him and then said in a language that he knew very
well: “I’d like to draw a portrait of you.”
   What to do?
   Zoppe knew in his heart that he had to dodge the request. He had to say
“No, thanks.” “No, I don’t feel like it.” “No, you frighten me.” “No, I don’t
want you to.”
   Instead he said yes.
   He couldn’t resist the kindness of those familiar-seeming eyes.

                                      .
    After three hours, the drawing was finished. “Can I see it?” Zoppe
asked.
    “I would rather you not.”
    “But ... but what do you mean? I sat here without moving for three
hours for you.”
    “The drawing will hurt you.”
    “Let me be the judge of that, damn it,” Zoppe said in an arrogant tone
he’d never before used in his life.
    The man motioned for him to come closer. Zoppe looked. Then, he
fainted.

                                      .
    That night he dreamed of the drawing. On one side, there was a man
with a blue turban, his face disfigured by an egg-shaped scar that made him
look strangely fierce. He was throwing a javelin. His arms were muscular.
His movements coordinated. He was almost handsome in that athletic pose.
On the other side was an elephant. Big ears, a big trunk. The elephant
resembled him in a way too. The elephant knew the javelin was aiming his
way. Zoppe noted something in the animal’s eyes. Something that he knew
well. It was called terror.
                                      .
    He didn’t find anyone sitting under the baobab at La Douce France. The
yellowish man had disappeared. He asked the other servants if they had
seen him. No one knew anything about it. A young man named Hamid,
originally from Harar, told him: “There was no man sitting under that
baobab. Yesterday it was just you sitting there, nobody else. You dreamed
that man up, my friend.”
                                    .
   That night Zoppe remembered the words of his Aunt Bibi, the
soothsayer. “Our conscience,” she used to say, “has a face.”
                                    .
    That’s how Zoppe ended up sitting on the bed with his legs folded
waiting for something to happen.
    The yellowish man didn’t take long to come.
    He still had elephant ears. But his skin was darker, grainier.
    “I don’t understand,” Zoppe blurted out, confused. “Who in the devil
are you?”
    “I’m you. How can you not recognize me? How can you still be
confused?”
    Only then did Zoppe remember that he had ears like an elephant’s and
his skin had spots. He also remembered that he drew when he was upset.
Putting lines and curves on paper had always helped him calm down.
Whatever he didn’t understand, he drew. That yellowish man was his
conscience taking bodily form. As his Aunt Bibi had always said: “Our
conscience has a face.”
                                    25
                                ADUA

I’m naked ...
    Sand covering me like gold ...
    Up in a tree waiting to be devoured ...
    Big lips slicked with gloss for extra allure ... Eyebrows furrowed, like a
cat, well defined ...
    Kohl highlighting my eyes, and who knows, maybe even my desire ...
Bangs straightened by a flesh-eating iron ...
    Brightly colored wraps in the beach scenes ... A little hairspray and I
feel effervescent ... And beads all over my body ...
    Lying back on calfskin I display myself obscenely to an oblivious
world. Meanwhile he’s hollering, “Close your legs more baby, don’t show
the hair, not yet, save it for now.” And a moment later, “Now fling them
open, like the windows when you wake up in the morning.” He has a raspy,
cavernous voice. He scares me. He’s the director of my movie, though. He’s
my master, he bought me for peanuts at a sale down in East Africa. I can’t
contradict him. So I nod, obedient, passive, as befits the defenseless like
me.
    My nails are sharp as the claws of a proud lioness.
    The manicurist told me, “With these, no one can break you.”
    Didn’t she have the experience to know that the nails of small-time
starlets don’t last?
    She should know that better than anyone.
    My nails will break, milady. And sometimes my heart breaks too. I
scratch, bite, paw.
    But it all lasts an instant. Time for one take. For one regret.
    “Give me languid now, baby,” the director orders.
    “Move those hips, come on, be a good girl.”
    And I am a good girl. Because that’s my job as an actress. I’m a
professional, I think.
    I wallow in that fiction.
    “Now move your wrists in circles ... that’s good, like an odalisque in the
pasha’s harem. Let the dance take you over, baby, and then move over to
him nice and slow, you’re a panther, baby, remember that. And now kiss
him, yeah, kiss him with passion.”
    Armando smells like garlic, but I have to pretend to love him, pretend
that he’s my only reason for living.
    I move toward him and smell vodka. But I know the script says I’m
supposed to claw him like a little kitten. I follow orders like a cadet. I have
no other choice. It’s written in the script. He lowers my head, authoritative.
    “See how good I am? Not one complaint, boss,” I say to the director.
But no one answers me now.
    Has the set been taken down? Where am I?
    And where’s my movie?
    Who are you, man who reeks of vodka? And what is this mahogany
furniture around us?
    Where’s the tropical beach we re-created at Capocotta with fake palm
trees? Where’s the crew? And my makeup artist? That fat lady who cleans
me off and wipes my sweat every other second? And those maniacal
costumers checking every wrinkle on my skimpy little dress?
    Where on earth has everyone gone?
    I’m still wearing my costume. I’m still made up like a slut.
    But then I remember, everything comes back to me in a jolt of pain.
    I’m not on the set anymore. We wrapped at five. They’ve taken me to a
luxury villa in the middle of Rome, off of a famous piazza.
    It was Sissi, it’s always her, always that disaster of a woman, who told
me in her fake nunnish tone: “There’s a dinner at the distributor’s house,
you know, that magnate who gave us all that money for the movie ... he
invited us. He wants to see you.”
    And I, dismissive, said: “Me?” I remember always having had that
sharp tone of voice with Sissi. Essentially, I couldn’t forgive her for what
she’d done to me.
    “So basically you have to go and you have to play nice with him.”
    “Nice?” I asked, a little disconcerted.
    “Do you want to become a star or not? Well you’ve got to play nice,
honey, otherwise you can forget about being a star.”
    “Forget about it?”
    “Yes, honey. And put on a nice little dress, it’s an elegant dinner.”
    “Really elegant?”
    “Just the right amount, you’ll see.”
    It was almost all women at the party, all with skimpy rags barely
covering our privates. And we all had plastic smiles contorting our faces.
    We were brunettes, blondes, redheads, one with purple hair—“She’s
eccentric,” someone whispered to me. They’d also recruited an Asian,
maybe Japanese or Korean, and then of course there was me, the drop of
chocolate over the double layer of whipped cream.
    He came up to me and said: “So you’re Arturo’s Negress. Not bad.
Long legs. I like the ones with long legs.”
    I looked at Sissi. I was alarmed. I felt so dirty. So empty.
    Sissi pushed me toward him and said: “He’ll give you orders like Arturo
on the set, you follow them, piece of cake.”
    I go down a long hallway with that man, who barely came up to my
shoulder blades. He keeps his hand on my bottom, kind of like Arturo
during the first days of shooting.
    “How old are you?” the magnate asks.
    “Twenty,” I lie.
    “A round number, like all of them, of age then ... the others always are
too.” And after a low laugh, he adds: “Between us, it’s smart not to say
seventeen, seventeen is bad luck,” and gives me a conspiratorial wink.
    I don’t know what to say. I nod just to do something.
    “Put this on, go over there,” he orders.
    It’s a nurse costume. I don’t understand what it’s for. But I put it on,
without a word. I don’t feel like contradicting the bald man with halitosis.
    “But don’t put anything underneath. I like bare skin.” I obey.
    And then without much of a prelude he has me kneel down in front of
him. “Afterward I’ll introduce you to the guests as the cousin of some
sheikh.”
    And with that, he pulls my hair back and looks at me, hurting me, and
then pushes me towards his nether parts.
    He’s not old. How old could he be? Fifty, fifty-five?
    But he acts like he’s old. He has no imagination. He’s a bully. He
doesn’t know how to handle a woman. Maybe he never knew how to
approach one.
    He trembles. He breathes hard. He starts panting. His sweat drips onto
my head. I’m trembling too. With disgust for myself.
    Is it worth it, Adua, all this filth for a star, for a dressing room, for
movies that mean nothing to you?
    I wish I could ask Marilyn, but she’s dead; she died badly, like so many,
too many starlets with more tits than talent.
    I wish I could ask Muna Kinky-Hair back in Somalia. I know what
she’d tell me: “Don’t act like some saint, Adua,” and, “you have to decide if
you want to pay this price or not.”
    Did I want to or not? I couldn’t tell. The price seemed too high and the
product total junk.
    I was confused.
    I just know that Marilyn died badly. But at least Marilyn had a shred of
talent. What about me? Do I?
    Though talent certainly didn’t save Marilyn. She died alone. She died
badly. What about me? Will I?
    Who will save me? I wonder. I want to shout the question. I don’t have
the courage. The magnate is already in position like a runner at the starting
gate.
    “Come here,” he orders.
    For the second time in one day I am on my knees in front of a man.
    The first time was in the morning, in front of Nick. But that was a scene
in the movie.
    Fiction.
    Nick ... Nick Tonno, my partner, my costar, a homosexual, or as the
director sometimes called him, “damned queer.” I loved my crazy partner,
that damned queer who the blessed heavens had led me to. Doing things
with Nick is ... was wonderful. He respects me. He guides me. He tells me:
“This torture will be over soon, you and I deserve to shoot better movies.”
    I dream: “I want to be Judy Garland in The Wizard of Oz, singing and
skipping around like a baby butterfly.”
    And he says: “What a vision you’d be in Dorothy’s ruby slippers.”
    We position ourselves inside a car. We have to pretend we’re making
love. That’s all I do in the movie, run naked on the beach and make love in
the most absurd places. “Show more of the gap between your thighs,” and
with Nick’s help I lift my skimpy slip higher. Nick rubs my head and
reassures me: “It’ll be over soon, hold on, think of Judy Garland.”
    Action, scene one, we’re in a convertible. He kisses me. Nick is a good
kisser. He’s so tender. He doesn’t want to eat me alive. “Do you want to get
married?” I whisper to him. It seems like a line from our script, but it’s
actually from my heart. In that scene we don’t need our voices. Arturo told
us that the moans will be added in the dubbing studio. We just have to fake
love talk and orgasm. I repeat the question: “Would you marry me, Nick?”
And he replies:
    “You know I can’t, Adua, I’m a homosexual.”
    And I say:
    “That’s why I want to marry you. You wouldn’t touch me like those
other brutes, like Arturo does when he gets bored with his wife. You would
respect me. I’d introduce you to my father and my aunt Fardosa.”
    “Are they nice?” Nick asks me. I don’t know how to answer, just that I
miss them. I feel like crying, but I don’t want to ruin the scene. I cling to
him desperately. He makes one of his killer faces and fake bites me on the
neck like a vampire. It tickles and I start laughing, but to keep from ruining
the scene I mime something that I have never experienced, that orgasm
thing everyone’s always talking about.
    Nick always smells good.
    Whereas the distributor, that bald magnate who I have to play nice with,
the man who Sissi enigmatically calls the marquis, smells like garlic.
    I go to open his fly. I want to get the whole thing over with quickly.
“Just put it in my mouth and then it’s good-bye, never see you again,” I
think. A flawless plan, I tell myself.
    I open his fly. I avoid looking at that snake. It still repulses me. I don’t
look at it, I turn my eyes away. It scares me.
    But I can’t be scared right now. It’s just a few seconds. I close my eyes.
I grab it firm.
    I take it in my mouth. It’s done, I tell myself.
    But the guy, this marquis, doesn’t have an erection. His contraption dies
in my mouth and a slimy rivulet drips pathetically onto the floor.
    “Move, whore,” he calls me.
    The word doesn’t offend me. That’s what I am now. A whore, a
sharmutta. That’s what they’ve turned me into. In Somalia I was a young
girl who was full of dreams and wanted to see the world. In just a few
months they’ve manipulated, abused, used, transformed me. It feels like
years, not months, have gone by. I feel so old, practically decrepit.
    I wish I had some water. To get that sour taste out of my mouth. But the
room is so dark. I can’t see anything. Only the shadowy mahogany wood.
    I see him crawl around the room like he’s blind. Then he switches on
the light. He puts himself together. I do too. We don’t speak.
    “You were good,” he tells me. And he gives me a manly slap on the
shoulder.
    “Good?” I wonder silently. “We didn’t do anything.”
    But I say nothing, it’s better not to talk to that man. He’s a bully, you
can tell that he always wants to be right.
    “Do you know how to dance?” he asks me.
    “No,” I reply curtly, irritated by such a personal question.
    “Then you’ll learn tonight. The other girls will teach you.”
    “Are we already going back out?”
    “Yes, pet,” he says, all sweet. I’m confused. I don’t understand.
    “Oh, and out there don’t mention our little encounter, they wouldn’t
understand.”
    “I won’t say a word, sir.”
    He likes being called sir.
    “Tell Sissi that we’ll distribute the movie well, we’ll make you a little
Negro star, you have nice legs, you deserve success.”
    We’re almost at the door. I’m about to open it. He stops me. “Wait,” he
says.
    “What?” I ask, a little dazed.
    “I have a gift.”
    And he gives me a diamond gold bracelet. I don’t know how to respond.
“I’m a generous man, didn’t Sissi tell you that?”
    I say nothing. Better to keep quiet in certain circumstances.
    I thank him. We return to the party.
    His hand on my bottom. Like on the way there.
    Back in the main room, he distributes big smiles. The other girls look at
me and my bracelet with envy.
    “Good, our little Adua,” Sissi says to me, and fingering the bracelet she
adds, “I see that you’ve done your duty.”
    I wanted to tell her the truth. But if I did that man would ruin me. He
has the power to. He’s filthy rich. He knows lots of people. Even in places
where an honest person shouldn’t be.
    I keep quiet. I’m shaking. “I want to go.”
    “But now it’s the best part, we’re dancing.”
    “But I don’t like to dance,” I yell.
    Everyone looks at me. A little stunned, clinking their glasses of
champagne. “Don’t yell, this is an elegant dinner,” Sissi says.
    And I don’t yell. I bow my head. I cave.
    Today I wouldn’t bow my head. Today I would yell.
    But today I’m old. Minutes, days, years have passed since that dinner.
I’ve had a miscarriage, bad men, countless disappointments.
    Today, though, I wouldn’t bow my head. I wouldn’t sell myself for a
star on a dressing room door like that little girl I was.
    The memory makes me yell.
    Now I’m not quiet anymore. Yesterday, for example, I yelled so loud
that I scared my husband, my sweet little Titanic, nearly to death. In my
sleep, I said: “No, it’s not worth it to eat dirt for a star.” And then I added:
“You can’t kill me without thinking I won’t put up a fight.” I started
shaking violently.
    And then my husband’s big, strong, capable hands held me still.
    “Adua, what’s wrong? Adua, calm down! You’re at home, with me.
Adua ...”
    I looked at him with my eyes gaping. At first I didn’t even recognize
him. I was still lost in the haze of the distant past.
    “Did you have a nightmare?” he asked me, concerned. How could I tell
him the truth?
    How could I tell him that unfortunately it wasn’t a bad dream, just an
unpleasant memory that comes to torment me every night? Later, I sold the
bracelet. But the memory won’t leave me alone. Every so often it comes
and throws dismay in my face.
    “Sorry,” I whispered to my clueless husband.
    “Sorry for what, Adua, you’re delirious, you were yelling, did you
know that? You screamed loud, you scared me. I’ll go get you a glass of
water.”
    “No, don’t get me anything, just hold me.”
    And he did it even though, to tell the truth, he was a little annoyed.
                                   26
                         TALKING-TO

It’s so strange not having you around anymore, Adua.
     Why did you leave? After all, I never treated you badly. You had a roof
over your head, and food too. I always gave you the first fruit ... remember
that sweet papaya that day? From Afgooye. You liked it so much. You
smiled at me. And I smiled at you too. In my way, I smiled at you. Sure, my
mustache hides my mouth, but I can smile like everybody else. All of you
always described me as a grouch. When you were under my roof you had
meat on your bones, you were pretty, solid, like a woman should be. And I
raised you. I raised you well. There’s not a girl raised better in this whole
dirty country. I worked as hard as I could to make you into a woman of
fortitude. I couldn’t bear the idea of you becoming like your mother. Your
mother was a zombie. Inept, starry-eyed, sluggish. She was slow, your
mother. Extremely slow. I was the only thought she had.
     Her brain, besides me, contained nothing.
                                    27
                               ZOPPE

Zoppe loathed Mogadishu. He couldn’t stand its slightly sweet odor.
Mogadishu made his stomach turn, with its well-to-do air and white
buildings. In Mogadishu he felt like a foreigner. Someone from down south,
a yokel from Magalo, whom the residents looked at snobbishly and even
with a certain pity. When he was little, his father often dragged him to that
city “to which we owe so much, my son.” Zoppe would come up with a
million excuses not to go. Once it was an upset stomach, another time a
high fever. He didn’t want to set foot in the capital. And he didn’t care that
he owed his life to it, he truly didn’t. But Haji Safar, who knew how to read
his boy’s heart, tugged him affectionately, saying: “Come on, lazy. That
won’t work with me. Get your bag ready, we’re going.” And that’s how the
boy bowed his head and obeyed his father every time.
    But everything was different that day. Haji Safar wasn’t by his side.
Zoppe had come with the Italians. Returned as a servant. A tool in
rapacious hands.
    During the trip from Massawa to Mogadishu, Zoppe couldn’t manage to
think of anything else besides his misfortune.
    On the ship, he wrestled with the dark visions that appeared to him so
vividly.
    Detached rooster heads, tongues hanging from pomegranate trees, a sea
red with blood, and him with wounds all over his back. And as the voyage
slowly progressed and he could feel Mogadishu approaching, his visions
became even more outrageous. A man riding a leopard laughed wildly,
while a crow made a nest on the snakelike head of a monster with swollen
lips. Zoppe didn’t recognize anything. In those monstrous visions nothing
had a human form. People with three layers of teeth were talking to oxen
that had rabbit ears, and crouched down next to them was a creature with a
giraffe’s head excreting butterflies over a pile of corpses. Massawa ...
    Damned city! The memory of it was driving him mad.
    “Mister, mister ... are you all right?”
    It was Uarda, one of the serving girls from the farmhouse where they
were staying, who jolted him back to the present.
    “Yes, fine,” replied Zoppe. “The air of Mogadishu is dizzying.”
    “You were talking to yourself, did you know that?” the girl laughed.
    Zoppe was annoyed by the impertinent observation, but he didn’t reply
lest he feel even dumber. He examined her. Uarda was pretty, very pretty.
Tall, perky breasts, heart-shaped derriere.
    “I have a headache,” Zoppe said.
    He wanted to say more to her. Like: “Run, get far away from here.”
Instead he just looked at her. Maybe she was an orphan. Otherwise no one
would have sent her to serve an Italian. Everyone in Mogadishu knew what
happened to Uardas in Italian houses.
    Zoppe suddenly felt drained. Weak. “Damn count,” he muttered to
himself.
    It was a nice house, the one that the Italian governorate in Mogadishu
had provided Celestino Anselmi. A typical colonial structure with a
Moorish staircase leading to the upper floors. The stark white building fell
into a certain harmony with the lush tropical garden surrounding it. “I’m
going to have a big party here tonight. I deserve it.”
    Zoppe only replied, “Yes, sir.”
    “The senses dance in this city, my dear boy.”
    Zoppe looked up at the sky. There wouldn’t be any party. The southwest
monsoon, the one that made even the jinns tremble, was coming. “Soon it’ll
beat down on the city and the damned count’s head,” Zoppe thought. And
that consoled him.

                                     .
    He and his father didn’t have an appointment with a date, time or place.
There was no “See you then,” between them. Father and son could meet just
by thinking of each other.
    And Fakr ad-Din was the only place where his father would have met
him in Mogadishu. It was their treasured place in that foreign-seeming city.
    As a little boy, Zoppe spent hours contemplating the verses from the
sura of The Cow from the Koran magisterially carved in Kufic script over
the door. It was pure joy for him to just stand there at the threshold where
the light chased the shadow between the thin marble columns.
    “There was a time,” Haji Safar had told him, “the time of our ancestors,
when this mosque was as big as the portion of sky contained in the eyes of
an angel.”
    In that mosque, repentant jinns asked forgiveness to heaven before
taking their last breath, and souls brimming with love for creation sought
refuge from the evils of the world.
    “If for some reason I don’t die in our holy city,” Haji Safar said, “you,
my adored son, will take me, emaciated and near death, on your shoulders,
and bring me here.” At Fakr ad-Din anything was possible. Zoppe had
experienced it for himself.
    It was there that he had seen a pink man for the first time. Zoppe was
small for his age and much bonier. In fact the women insisted that Haji
Safar have him eat chicken broth and dates to keep him alive.
    “Doesn’t this child have a mother?”
    “She died bringing him into the world. But he has my wives to take care
of him. Fawzia, Alia, Halima coddle him as if he were their child, fruit of
their own womb. He couldn’t be in better hands.”
    “But why do these sticks hold him up, like an old paralytic?”
    It was in those moments when Haji Safar deplored human souls. Men of
dust who condemned their neighbor’s every flaw.
    And he, Haji, didn’t want to yield to that brutality. Of course his son had
suffered, a high rheumatic fever had struck him in his sleep a year earlier
and nearly killed him. But it wasn’t his time and he was spared. That’s all
that counted. Ultimately, just that.
    “You will overcome, my son,” he said. “You won’t notice the difference
between you and your peers. And I swear to you on my name and my honor
that soon I’ll see you run like an ostrich through the endless savannah.”
    Zoppe looked at his father with trust. He really hoped he would be able
to run and play like the other kids.
    Then one night, one of those agitated by dreams and chimeras, an image
was imprinted on Haji’s mind. “That,” the old wise man said with surprise,
“is the door to the Fakr ad-Din mosque. So Mogadishu is the place where I
must take my son, that’s where I will finally see him run.” And the next day
he prepared for the journey.
    He spent two nights and two days mixing the ointments he would rub
onto his son’s battered legs.
    “This herb, husband, is called devil’s claw, but really it’s made from the
nails of angels. If the little one’s muscles are inflamed it will dull the pain,”
said Fawzia, the first of his wives.
    “And this one is blackcurrant,” said his second wife, Halima. “My
brother, the merchant, brought it for me as a gift. It is from the rocky
mountains of Asia. Its bark is smooth. If fear comes to torment little
Zoppe’s leg, this plant will know what to do.”
    “Here, dear, in my hands is prickly little aloe,” said Alia with a laugh,
his last wife. “It will bring you good dreams and helps with digestion.”
    Haji Safar thanked his three wives for such sweet gifts. He said “thank
you” because those were the only right words to say.
    After the morning prayer, father and son set off for Mogadishu, heading
away from their beautiful blue sea.
    They immediately entered the barren bush. No living thing crossed their
path the first day. Only a vulture followed them overhead in hopes of seeing
them take a wrong step. But Haji Safar had traveled those paths for years.
He knew the secrets of the seemingly hostile land. Zoppe, to entertain
himself, watched the ants, intent on their endless work. Diligent, they
hauled bits of meat on their little backs, perhaps left over from some
hyena’s meal. The first night, restless owls made the little one nervous.
“They’re trills of love,” Haji Safar explained, and Zoppe, who had no
interest in that explanation, said: “Father, when will we see the sea again?”
     The second day they came upon some shepherds. They slept with them
in empty tukuls and satisfied their thirst with the goat milk they were
offered. They also spent their third day with the shepherds. On the fourth,
Haji Safar said: “We must leave you. We have to cross the sea.”
     Their donkey was tired. Haji Safar petted his neck affectionately. “Not
much longer, my old man. Just one more little push and we will reach the
place we need to reach.”
     It was after these words that the dry smell of the bush was replaced by
the sudden scent of cinnamon.
     “Smell that, son?” Haji Safar asked, excited. “That’s the smell of
Mogadishu.”
     Zoppe was overwhelmed by that chaos of sounds and smells so different
from one another.
     Then he saw the colors. He saw the yellow of smiles, the purple of
violence, the green of resignation, the pink of tears. The people in
Mogadishu wailed. They wailed like an African wild dog about to die. They
wailed over unsettled accounts, love gone wrong, a pound of meat that
wasn’t enough to feed a family. Haji Safar and Zoppe went through a
covered market and the boy was fascinated by the mechanical precision of
the goldsmiths at work.
     A flash of greed appeared in the little one’s eyes. He wanted to stay
there forever, cover himself in that marvelous gold.
     But the donkey didn’t stop. This wasn’t their destination. They walked
for another hour. Then they saw in the middle of an ochre expanse a crane
regal in its posture.
     “It’s a sign,” said Haji Safar, who stopped the donkey and his step.
“This is where what is to happen will happen.”
     The mosque was in sight, but still far away.
     “I’ll be right back. Wait for me here,” Haji Safar told his son. And he
left him alone.
     And that was when, all of a sudden, the pink man appeared.
    On his face was a long yellow beard and on his head a few fog-colored
curls. He was dressed in a long black cloth, his feet weren’t visible, his
hands just barely, and they were pink too.
    “What if he eats me?” Zoppe thought.
    “Father,” he started shouting, “Father, where are you?” “I’m here, can
you see me? In front of this big door.”
    Zoppe wondered how to reach him. And that was how he began slowly
crawling up the mound leading to the mosque entrance, dragging his
crutches behind him.
    The pink man, at the sight of the crawling boy, thought in his mercy to
help him. “Aniga waxaan ahay saaxiibka.” I am your friend. Those poorly
pronounced words were for little Zoppe the beginning of the end.
    He tossed his crutches aside and began running like mad. Running
toward his father, toward salvation.
    “A miracle!” cried Haji Safar.
    And he too ran barefoot toward his son. He lifted the boy, hugged him
close, became a father again, and covered him in kisses.
    The word “miracle” provoked a delirium. Word spread inside the
mosque and even the imam, with a trail of believers in tow, wanted to come
and see. Excitement overwhelmed the old soothsayer like nothing ever
before. And he began saying how merciful Allah had been charitable with
him and his little Zoppe. “Now if he wants, he’ll be able to fly with the
falcons at sunset.”
    As he waited for his father to appear, Zoppe thought of this bond
between them that had never faltered. “I’m sure I’ll see him here. It’s our
soul place.”

                                     .
    “Father, don’t leave me,” he murmured, his lips dry from all the
excitement.
    Bitter tears lined his well-fed face and he tried to wipe them away
quickly with the sleeves of his jelabiyad.
    Over his head a falcon spotted some lost chicks, while a cat looked for a
secluded cave to take his final breath in solitude.
    Then the baboon appeared.
    He looked at Zoppe through his spotted mask and seemed to laugh at
his desperation. Zoppe wanted nothing more than to throw a rock at that
cheeky baboon.
    But something, or someone, stayed his hand.
    The baboon sat on his two feet, his head turned eastward to greet the
sun. He raised his free hands, revealing a moon-shaped object clutched in
his right hand and displayed like a trophy.
    Then without warning the baboon jumped on him. Aiming right for the
turban. “What are you doing, you stupid animal?” he yelled.
    Something had gotten into that baboon and he had no intention of
releasing his prey. Zoppe gave up on getting it back.
    “Ah, what a nice breeze,” he remarked. He was grateful to his outburst
for liberating him from that servitude.
    “How did you know I hate that turban?”
    The baboon indicated the sun, shaking his hands frantically.
    “You’re a strange beast, you are.” Zoppe chuckled, toying with the dry
twigs around him.
    These had been frenetic and painful days for him.
    “Ah, baboon, if only you could give my tormented soul a little relief.”
    The baboon started dancing. He showed off his red bottom irreverently
and Zoppe laughed heartily.
    “You monkeys are unpredictable.”
    The baboon shook his head and made a loud noise.
    “What do you know about it, huh? You shake your head like that just
for fun. You have no idea what I saw last night. I was awake, not dreaming.
If you had seen what I saw you’d quit your laughing and would be crying
with me.”
    And Zoppe began to spew words and images. “Last night I saw nothing
but death around me. I saw mangled black bodies. Hanged men, houses
burned down, hands cut off, decapitated heads stuck on spears, stabbed
women, disfigured corpses, children tied up and dragged while still alive,
deacons executed, little girls raped. I saw blood, pus, brains. And I saw
heads severed from their bodies placed on silver trays surrounded by people
laughing. The heads belonged to Ethiopians and the smiling mouths to
Italians. I saw them making fun of the corpses and taking pictures of them.
Then I saw them wrapping the photos of the horrors to send as gifts to their
girlfriends in Italy.”
     Zoppe put his face in his hands and cried like a little child.
     “I sold myself like the Christian Judas for a pile of money. If those
people die it’s also my fault. How will I be able to look my friend Dagmawi
in the eyes? It would have been better if I’d never been born and my
father’s seed had dried up.”
     Zoppe doubled over like a wounded zebra.
     The baboon came near him and started purring like a cat.
     “You’re sweet, baboon. But you can’t understand me. No one can
understand me. I can see things before other men, but I wasn’t granted the
power to change the future, neither theirs nor mine.”
     The baboon shook his head.
     “But ... but ... so you do understand?”
     Zoppe looked at the half-moon that the animal was holding in his hands.
That was when he realized. The baboon was none other than his father, Haji
Safar. The old man had kept their appointment.
                                    28
                                ADUA

Lul told me that Labo Dhegax, my house in Magalo, is worth its weight in
gold. “I had it appraised for you, honey.”
    “Well then?” I asked with a lump in my throat that made me greedier
than I actually am.
    “Well, the profit would be about a million dollars, give or take a few
cents, a net profit, to be clear.”
    I said: “Net, sister?”
    “Yes, dear, you would pocket a cool million dirty American dollars,
aren’t you happy?”
    I sank down to the floor. I’d half-fainted, as if someone had given me
horrible news. I tried to take deep breaths. I tried to revive the beats in my
time-ravaged heart.
    “A million dollars?” I repeated like an idiot. It was a number out of an
American TV show, a mafia deal, money laundering, not something I could
grasp in my little, old lady reality.
    “But are all the prices for houses and land in Somalia that high?” I
asked, stunned.
    “The real estate bubble has peaked and houses are worth gold, sister.
And you know, there’s oil here. Everyone is selling, buying, quoting,
appraising. It’s like the Wall Street stock exchange. Sure, in Mogadishu
everything is more expensive, more inflated, but even in Magalo, I promise
you, you can make some big figure deals.”
    “A million dollars? Is that possible? For my rickety old house?”
    “The time to make deals won’t last forever, my sister. We have to go for
it now, before it’s too late. Now that they’ve caught a whiff of oil, it’s easy
money, but soon they’ll realize that Somalia is a rip-off and the bubble will
burst in the sun. And the houses will go back to being the trash they always
were.”
    I liked it when Lul made herself my own personal guardian spirit. It was
comforting to know that she was always by my side thinking about my
needs.
    Meanwhile, that exorbitant figure whirled around in my head: a million
dollars. I’d never seen that much money in my life.
    In general money and I have never gotten along. I’ve always spent it
badly and in the brief period when I did have some I let myself get hustled
like a fool.
    “Get on a plane and come down here. Happiness is here,” my Lul told
me. An electronic voice broke into our excited conversation and cut off the
line.
    “Lul,” I yelled. Lul ...
    Ah, I really could have used a Lul in 1977. Of course I hadn’t been
offered a million dollars then, but a decent stack of Italian lire, yes. And
there were the American studios, that small part in a Bond movie they
wanted to offer me and that I was dying to play.
    But ...
    But in 1977 there was no Lul to help me. I was alone as a dog and
completely at the mercy of Sissi and Arturo. That’s why everything went
wrong after a while.
    If she had been by my side, I wouldn’t have ended up penniless, drained
dry and duped like a dunce by those lowlifes. Lul would have told me: “You
need an agent, honey,” and “make sure to read every clause in the contract
you sign.” If Lul had been there I wouldn’t have frozen to death in a
miserable little room in a pension on Via Cavour. She would have
demanded a bathtub, room service, soft pillows, a dignified wardrobe,
comfortable shoes, clean and ironed sheets.
    She would have slapped Sissi and called her a user. And Sissi wouldn’t
have dared say to me: “What extravagant requests you have, Adua,” or
“What a spoiled Negro you are.” Lul certainly wouldn’t have sent me
around in unseemly little rags and with all my skin hanging out. If Lul had
been there, Arturo wouldn’t have touched me nor would the marquis have
laid his hands on my backside. Lul would have kept me away from the
drugs, alcohol, cheap cigarettes, fried food, men who wanted only my body.
    Lul would have brought me back to our traditions. And she would have
put me on a diet and would have allowed me sweets only as a treat on
Sunday mornings.
    If Lul had been there I wouldn’t have spent so much time crying alone.
She would have taken me on walks down Via del Corso to get gelato at
Giolitti. If Lul had been there she would have called me at least twice a day,
even just to tell me: “I’m so glad you exist in the world.” And then Lul
would have told me loud and clear to forget about Nick Tonno. “He’s
homosexual, he can’t love you. Get it in your head, abaayo.” Of course she
would have advised me to stop obsessing over him, standing below his
house every night, buying him flowers I couldn’t afford. “He can only give
you friendship, nothing more, accept it and move on.”
    If Lul had been there she would have made me finish school. She would
have pulled me by the ear and shoved my nose in the pages of a dictionary.
“Without languages you’re nobody,” she would have told me, and after a
certain weighty pause she’d have added, “but without your own you’re
lost.” If Lul had been there they wouldn’t have made me sign one-sided
contracts where I ceded all interest in my name and all merchandising of
my character. If Lul had been there I wouldn’t have lost millions of old lire
by forgetting to register my official residency at the police station, and with
the Italian social security administration. If Lul had been there I would have
had proper documents from the very beginning and the opportunity to
become an Italian citizen after five years. If Lul had been there I wouldn’t
have exhibited myself at seedy promotional events where drunk men
slipped bills in my green garter, barking unspeakable obscenities at me. Lul
would have demanded respect for my person and I think she would have
also intervened with the movie script. She wouldn’t have let me do all those
nude running scenes and she would have objected to shooting on the beach
in the cold. She would have said something like: “If you want her to run as
God made her then rent a set in the Caribbean and not in Capocotta.” If Lul
had been there she would have checked the press every day to see what
came out about the movie and about me. She would have spared me the
pain of headlines like “Burning Hot Black Hole” or “Steamy Kiss from the
Abyssinian Abyss.” She would have demanded a title for me that was
certainly more dignified than “black Venus” and she would have been
furious if anyone said to me on the street, “Hey, black beauty, I’d ride you
right now.” If Lul had been there she would have dragged me to the piazza
with the women who were protesting for the right to an abortion and she
would have shown me that those women were also fighting for my rights, to
free my body from the drool-covered desires of a decadent society. If Lul
had been there she would have stopped me from depilating myself like a
white woman: “But if Somalis aren’t hairy, what are you removing?” And
Lul would have also forbidden me to use whitening creams, saying: “Are
you crazy? They cause skin cancer! And you fool, your skin tone is
beautiful!” And then Lul, I’m sure of it, would have objected like a maniac
to my straightening my hair. “You’re ridiculous with this spaghetti, it’s not
believable, Adua,” and she would have made me feel how much better it
was to be free and keep your own curly hair. And if Lul had been there she
would have taught me to be proud of myself. She would have recited my
family tree like a poem in hendecasyllables and then she would have said:
“You were born from these ancestors’ bones, don’t forget their bones, your
roots.” If Lul had been there she would have forced me to call my father.
“Parents must be loved.” And she would have whispered in my ear:
“Because you don’t know when God will call them back to Him.” If Lul
had been there I wouldn’t have made that movie with Arturo, that ugly,
obscene movie.
                                     29
                          TALKING-TO

I saw you. There you were, dressed like an old woman, surrounded by
beggars. I saw you, Adua. You didn’t have the courage to enter, to look me
in the face, to confront me. Do I really scare you that much, my daughter?
    I saw your movie. I cried.
    I don’t cry. But watching your movie, I cried. I have failed in this life. If
I let my own humiliation come to you it only means that I have failed. I
don’t know how to treat others, Adua. I didn’t know how to treat that fool,
your mother. She loved me too much, the fool. They called her Asha the
Rash because deep down she was reckless and she liked to take on lost
causes. I was the biggest lost cause of all. She fell in love with my needy
eyes. And I, instead of taking her love, went against it. I tried to destroy her
and her love along with her. No one has ever loved me so much in this life.
No one has ever proven me so right and so wrong. Asha, your mother,
wanted to guide me. She’d tell me: “What do you expect from the past?
Now you can make up for it. Now you can fix everything. You can be
better.” She was always enthusiastic, always optimistic. She died with her
optimism. When she brought you into the world, she lasted long enough to
see you. She lay her eyes on you and then she expired with a smile. When I
saw that life was going out of her I yelled like a madman, I nearly dropped
you. The women, diligent, ran over to grab you from my fragile hands. And
from that moment on I couldn’t be alone with you. Between us I put
indifference, then an invented hate, a terror remote-controlled like those toy
cars kids play with today. I don’t know, I didn’t know how to be a father.
Maybe I owe you an apology. But I can’t. I don’t know how to use certain
words. But I can tell you one thing: watching that movie, I realized how
much you’ve suffered in this life. In the end, you and I are no different,
someone humiliated us, put us down. I stayed down. Maybe things will turn
out better for you. Maybe.
                                     30
                                ZOPPE

“Sheeko sheeko, sheeko xariir.”
     Story story, story of silk.
     That’s how all the tales Zoppe heard as a boy began. After the evening
prayer, his father would call him over, and he would curl up sweetly at his
feet. It was the only place where he felt truly safe. The only place where he
felt alive. His father had a strong and sincere voice. A voice that opened up
to all magic. The words flowed one after another and created worlds where
even a baby chick could rise to the occasion and become the bravest of
warriors. Haji Safar knew how to make him laugh, but then without
warning he would plunge his son into inaccessible lows. All those demons
filling the scenes scared little Zoppe to death. But there was always a clever
shepherdess to cheer him up. Howa, Araweelo, Wil Wal—he quickly
learned the names of the extraordinary characters that populated his father’s
tales. Then one day he grew too big to curl up at his father’s feet, and just as
it had begun, that flow of stories stopped. But the words didn’t. They
underwent a change. Zoppe was a man now and Haji Safar relied on him for
household matters. Every so often politics would come up in conversation
too. But it was the stories of their ancestors that bound the old father to his
beloved son. Ancient stories scented with cinnamon and cardamom. It was
always the father who would speak. Zoppe would just nod or cock his head
in a sign of contentment. He didn’t want to destroy those moments with his
sharp voice and sputtering rage. He preferred to keep quiet. But that day, at
the clearing in front of the Fakr ad-Din mosque, the roles were reversed. It
was the father who wanted to hear the son’s story. It was Haji Safar who
strained his ears to catch every sound that came out of Zoppe’s mouth.
    “Massawa ... that’s the city I got lost in, Father.” Massawa ...
    It had happened a few days before. Zoppe couldn’t manage to get that
cursed place out of his head. It was a port, an inlet, one of the most
important cities in Eritrea, that country the Italians insisted on calling the
founding colony and which the most inveterate fascists considered the
outpost of the empire. The count had an appointment that morning and
judging by his pace, he didn’t want to be late. They quickly crossed through
the market. And Zoppe’s spirit, despite the rush, was captivated by the
showy spectacle that East Africa offered. Languages mixed together in a
magical alchemy fused by the sharp taste of dates from Egias. The girls
flapped their fans to drive away the voracious flies trying to dirty the blocks
of tamarind. The melons from inland and the watermelons grown along the
border stood out at the richer stands. Sweet potatoes were everywhere, even
on the ground, with the risk of tripping. But what made Zoppe’s heart burst
were the little fish fried in big vats of oil. The fish were immersed for a few
seconds, just enough time to quiver, and then they were eaten hot with pita
baked in terracotta pots. If he had been alone he would have made a buffet
of those little fried fish. But Count Anselmi’s steps were too fast and they
tore him away. The count moved like a hyena that has spotted its prey. He
darted confidently through the labyrinth of narrow streets in the port
district.
    Massawa was a city he knew well. They shot through the dark. That
shadowy race foresaw no stops.
    “Will it be much longer, Count?”
    No answer. Just a grunt. And Zoppe realized he was in trouble.

                                       .
    Damp and darkness. Zoppe was greeted by the familiar scent of rats. He
felt trapped without understanding why. His eyes slowly adjusted to the
darkness. He sensed that the room was small and very crowded. Shadows
popped out from everywhere, and little by little took shape.
    “Zoppe, listen well, translate every word, don’t leave out even a sigh.”
The count was clear. Not even a sigh.
    In the middle of that darkness were two men surrounded by servants. A
wrinkled old man with eyes like an octopus and a curly-haired young man
with fine lips. The old man was sitting on a cart. He was wearing a white
tunic embroidered with gold. A servant, Zoppe noted with dismay, shaded
his master under a little white parasol. Zoppe wondered from what. The
servant was breathing hard and Zoppe was worried.
    They were Ethiopian dignitaries, he could tell by their expensive and
ornate dress.
    What were they doing in Massawa, in enemy territory?
    His attention shifted to the young man with delicate lips, the old man’s
grandson or late-born son. His hair was a messy pile of curls and mist that
he struggled to keep under control. He smelled like coconut and jasmine.
His chin was receding and his dark eyes deep set. His aquiline nose towered
imperiously over a gaunt face that had little royalty in it. Nothing about that
young man seemed solid. That was clear from the demeanor of his servants,
who paid him little attention. He was wearing a suit, a souvenir from the
West, fit to bursting, the sleeves too short for his long arms. And the tails
dangled flaccidly over his chicken legs. Zoppe found the situation very odd.
But he didn’t say a word about it.
    He didn’t ask questions. He just got ready to translate. He had to do his
job well, it was the only way he could earn his freedom. And perhaps—why
not—a little cash. He had to be prompt and precise. Translate word by
word. He couldn’t judge. Open and close his mouth, that was his task.
Nothing more. He couldn’t think. He couldn’t interfere. He couldn’t
improve. He had to just open and close his mouth.
    He looked at the old man sitting on the cart. There was something
disturbing about his posture. His spine was curved in on itself and it made
him into a pile of rags. But it was his hands, which the old man kept in plain
sight, that worried him. They were nervous hands, shaking, with pale nails.
Hands that looked a little like the claws of a bird of prey. Demanding,
ferocious hands. Hands that were perhaps stained with innocent blood.
Where did those hands come from? From what part of Ethiopia? Zoppe
asked himself if he would be able to translate all the cruelty contained in
those hands.
    Especially in those fat fingers. They seemed on the verge of exploding.
“What if I can’t do it? What if I don’t understand? Who knows what dialect
of Amharic this guy speaks.” He started to tremble. Beads of sweat
gathered on his forehead. He who knew all the languages of East Africa
now was afraid of being left speechless. A rank terror seized him by the gut.
It was as if a vortex had suddenly appeared in his head. And everything he
knew had been swallowed by it. For a moment Zoppe couldn’t even
remember his own name.

                                      .
    Zoppe’s head started spinning. There was something different about that
day, that smell, those faces, that room. He looked at the old man and his
son. And then his eyes moved to the servants. They all had the same
expression, same nose, same absent air. They were tired, fed up, mad or
maybe just resigned. They all had curly hair and amber skin, a jangling belt
and big ears. Together they formed a flat expanse of black skin and stifled
sentiments. There was something familiar and perverse in that picture. But
Zoppe couldn’t seem to figure out what. Then almost unexpectedly came
the old man’s first words, jolting him from his venomous thoughts.
    “Tena yistilign,” he began.
    Zoppe had to focus on that opaque, translucent voice. It was beautiful.
A rugged singsong that could awaken a sleep-soothed soul to new life. But
his words were harsh, sharp, horrible. Zoppe couldn’t stop to think about
their meaning, because then he wouldn’t have translated anything. He
would have been lost. A carcass that even a vulture would have left alone.
The old man’s eyes dominated the dark. They stood out imperiously in that
room that smelled of rats. But it was Count Anselmi’s cannibal gaze that
confused Zoppe. His aristocratic grace was gone. The count’s Italian, once
pleasant, had become a primordial scream. Even his once-elegant hands
were the hoofs of a warthog in heat. In the middle of these people Zoppe
felt alone. Traversed by the poisoned arrows of betrayal. Every word
wounded him. Every gesture outraged him. The old man was offering Italy
his support for the upcoming war. He would supply arms, men, refreshment,
provisions. He promised to kill Emperor Haile Selassie himself, if
necessary. The old man was signing a blood pact with Italy, from which
there was no return. And he, Zoppe, was translating it. No, he couldn’t think
about it. He had to open and close his mouth. That’s all. Open and close his
mouth. Leave nothing out. Not even the sighs.
    The count gladly accepted and promised the pathetic old man a grand
career for his son. “You won’t have anything to fear with us.” And with
that, he tossed a wad of Ethiopian talleros in the air, which the old man
awkwardly tried to grab. “Naturally, you’ll be compensated for your loyalty
to Italy.” Another rainfall of talleros went through the room. The count
laughed with satisfaction. It had been so easy to buy off those Negroes.
Child’s play leading them to betray their own people. At that moment the
old man yelled over to his son: “Thank the gentle count who has been so
good to us.” The young man, who hadn’t moved a muscle throughout that
entire discussion, began to awaken like a big golem dulled by time. In an
instant he had thrown himself at the count’s feet and was kissing the muddy
toes of his boots.
                        EPILOGUE:
          PIAZZA DEI CINQUECENTO

Je demande qu’on me considère à partir de mon Désir.
As soon as I desire I am asking to be considered.
—Frantz Fanon

He left. Two hours ago now.
     I put him on a high-speed train for Milan. He’ll figure it out from there.
He has the other tickets. The fat man helping us said he would take care of
everything. That he has ferried hundreds of people all over Europe. And
that with him there was no risk of being caught by the border police. “It’s a
cinch,” he said. And he added: “But you need nice clothes, recognizable
brands, maybe a nice jacket— he has to look respectable.” So a couple of
hours beforehand, we went to a store downtown and bought two pairs of
pants, the kind businessmen wear to pick up girls on the weekends, two
dress shirts, the usual white one and blue one, and some decent shoes.
Dressed up like that my little Titanic looked like a man about town. He was
handsome in those clothes that were so removed from his life experience.
     “Have an intelligent look on your face during the trip,” the smuggler
told him. “They can’t see a starving refugee, a dirty Somali, a nervous
wreck. You have to radiate confidence from every pore. Make the world
believe you’re in control and don’t have a care in the world.” The fat
smuggler, who was named Omar like all the rest of them, advised my little
Titanic to get into character. “You should seem like a student or a guy on a
weekend getaway. Be cool, basically.” All the way through Ventimiglia the
trip would be smooth, and after that it would be in the hands of God and the
smugglers. I paid dearly for that trip. It cost me a lot. I couldn’t have
imagined how much those trips cost.
    Bastards!
    “You shouldn’t complain,” Omar told me with a smirk. “My prices are
competitive and with me you can be sure that your little friend will reach
his destination safe and sound.”
    “But, lady,” he warned, “you have to forget about Sweden. At most, he
can shoot for Germany. At least if they take his fingerprints there, there’s a
good chance they’ll keep him and won’t return him to sender. Just say you
were mistreated in Italy and they’ll let you stay in Germany. The Germans
care about human rights; after the Holocaust they have to be nice.”
    Omar made me sick.
    “Let’s go for Germany,” my husband said. “As long as you get me away
from here.” I wanted him to get away too.
    “I won’t come with you to the train,” I said as we crossed Piazza dei
Cinquecento. “From here on you’ll have to manage alone. And I’ve never
liked good-byes.”
    I looked around. The piazza was pandemonium, enveloped in the
exhaust of the buses occupying every space in the terminus like beached
whales. People zigzagged frenetically and even the most elderly were
possessed by a delirious hunger for speed. They ran obliquely toward an
uncertain, often completely chance future. Piazza dei Cinquecento seemed
more like a freeway than a piazza. It wasn’t a place to stop and chat. The
words would get lost in an incoherent, sometimes disturbing rumble. Piazza
dei Cinquecento was wrapped up with my history like nowhere else. Piazza
of migrants, first arrivals, departures, my many regrets. In that piazza, so
disconnected from itself, I had found and lost myself a thousand times. I
remember when, in those early, crazy years, posing as an actress, I crossed
it half-naked in skimpy clothes, because Sissi, always Sissi, had ordered me
to show off my beauty to Rome. And I obeyed. This is where I came to
know infamy. But it is also here that, thanks to my friend Lul, years later, I
made myself a new life. More serious, modest, sensible clothes. Here, in the
darkest years, I rediscovered the smile of my people. Behind the station,
they sold the xalwo I was crazy about. I had to cross Piazza dei Cinquecento
to get to that strange Somalia that had developed in the back streets of the
station neighborhood. I even met my Titanic in Piazza dei Cinquecento.
Drunk, he’d hang around different areas of Rome: Corso Italia, Piazza
Vittorio, Ponte Lungo. But it was in Piazza dei Cinquecento that I saw him
bellowing profanities with malicious gin flowing through his veins. It is
there, in that piazza that Italy had dedicated to its fallen soldiers in East
Africa, that I’d manufactured a papier-mâché love.
    Suddenly I saw something loom over my head. Something white and
shiny. “Get down, duck,” my husband yelled.
    But I was blinded by the whiteness, I couldn’t move. It was the most
beautiful thing I’d ever seen in my life.
    Then I noticed something yellow. All wrinkled. I don’t know when I
realized that it was the yellow of a bird’s feet. It flew over me. And without
my catching a good look, it took my turban. Tore it off violently.
    “Cover your face or it’ll scratch you, Adua.”
    I couldn’t understand why that seagull had targeted me.
    “They’re going to eat us,” a man said, “like in that Hitchcock movie.” A
woman asked if I needed help.
    I yelled to my husband: “See that bird, just sitting there looking at us,
do you see how it’s looking at us?”
    And it was true. It was staring at me.
    “Take the cloth, save the cloth,” I said to my Titanic. But my husband
didn’t move.
    The seagull stared at me again. It was as if it wanted to tell me
something. Apologize.
    Then it started pecking at the fabric. “Stop it,” I yelled to my Titanic.
But my husband didn’t move.
    The seagull made a disaster of the fabric with its pointy beak. “Stop it,
please,” I begged.
    “No, Adua,” he replied. “I won’t, that seagull did us a favor. If only I’d
had the guts.”
    “How dare you!”
    “You looked terrible with that dull rag on your head. Right over there, at
Habshiro, they sell scarves from the Emirates, the latest fashion. Now my
wife will be beautiful and chic too. A veil in red, in green, one for all the
days of the week.”
    It was my father’s, that turban.
    I had snatched it one afternoon in Somalia, ages ago.
    The very day I had gone to Magalo for the premiere of my movie. A
premiere that never happened. My father paid the manager of Cinema
Munar the equivalent of three full houses for them not to show it.
    Three showings ... Was that my price tag?
    Three showings was what I was worth to my father, three showings.
    Three showings for him not to look bad, not to disgrace the family
name, so he could keep on pretending to have a daughter.
    My price.
    Three showings not to see me, to erase me, not to be ashamed. My
father had broken my heart once again.
    That day, step by step, my feet took me to what had once been my
house.
    I wanted to be Marilyn, I wanted to be Audrey, I wanted to be Katharine
or at least Kim Novak.
    I wanted to tap dance like Ginger Rogers and do the splits like Cyd
Charisse.
    I wanted flowers from Gene Kelly and looks full of respect from a
passing Jimmy Stewart.
    I wanted the white clothes, the crinolines, the puffy sleeves.
    I wanted Billy Wilder to make me an icon and Errol Flynn to come and
save me.
    But most of all I’d have liked to be Ruby Dee. Ruby was black like me.
And she didn’t have to sell herself. Ruby fought for civil rights. I never
fought for anything.
    I was swathed in leopard skins and I ran as naked as Eve the sinner. I
was always chased by a serpent.
    Always hounded by shame. I was tired, so tired.
    That was when, almost by accident, my eye fell on the clothes hung out
to dry. A listless look, devoid of nerve.
    But it was enough to fill my field of vision with sheets, tops, wraps,
garees and guntiino. The blue stuck out in all that white.
    I would have recognized that blue out of a thousand blues. I knew that
cloth well. My father wrapped it around his head and never took it off.
    “So he does take it off every once in a while,” I said to myself. In a
flash I went and stole the cloth.
    I didn’t see my father that day.
    I didn’t see my father any other day.
    I never saw him again, to tell the truth.
    All I had left of him was that blue strip of cloth, that strange turban,
which up until a few hours ago I wouldn’t have taken off for anything in the
world.
    And then that seagull, with one swoop, in the middle of Piazza dei
Cinquecento, ripped it away from me.
    Do you realize, my little elephant, what it had done?
    It was the sign of my slavery and my old shame, that turban. It was the
yoke I had chosen to redeem myself.
    What would I do now without my slavery on my head? How would I
atone for everything I’d done now?
    “Ahmed,” I finally asked, calling my husband by name, “why didn’t
you help me?”
    “I did help you,” Ahmed said, with an amused look. “That bird was sent
by heaven.”
    “Really?”
    “Really.”
    Ahmed ... ah, Ahmed, I’m going to miss you.
    I had never realized up until that moment how much that boy I picked
up at the station loved me. I’ve been horrible for calling him Titanic all this
time.
    Oh, little elephant, how many mistakes I make. I miss my father and my
husband.
     Ahmed even gave me a gift, just imagine.
     “I got this for you,” he said. “I didn’t want to leave without giving you a
gift.” It was a big package.
     I tore off the yellow wrapping paper.
     It was incredible to see that my husband—he still was my husband—
had bought me a video camera.
     “Where did you find this kind of money?”
     “I borrowed some, nothing big, and some friends helped me out.”
     “Really?”
     “I never gave you gifts. And I was sorry to leave without a little
something for you.
     You’ve been kind. You saved me. You loved me. I’m grateful to you for
that.”
     “Thanks,” I whispered.
     Ahmed took me in his arms, in the middle of that Capitoline chaos.
     And then he said, “Now you can film whatever you want, now you can
tell your story however you think and you feel.”
     “Seriously?”
     “Yes, seriously. And finally you’ll be able to discover what there is
across the sea.” Around us, Piazza dei Cinquecento was smiling.
                   HISTORICAL NOTE

This novel weaves together three historical moments: Italian colonialism,
1970s Somalia, and our present day, which has seen the Mediterranean
transformed into an open grave of migrants.
    The characters in Adua balance on the architecture of this multivoiced
story and in a certain sense make it their own. Over the course of the
narrative I have not analyzed these periods in detail because I wanted to
transform historical events into emotions, visions, experiences.
    But now I’d like to provide a little more information about the context
and background of my characters.
    Italian colonialism has been one of the great repressions of the country’s
historiography. Only thanks to Angelo Del Boca’s monumental work Gli
Italiani in Africa Orientale (The Italians in East Africa, Laterza 1976, now
reprinted by Mondadori) was a topic long swept under a rug of silence
finally addressed. Fortunately, today we have a vast choice of historical and
other texts. In particular, I recommend: Nicola Labanca, Oltremare. Storia
dell’espansione coloniale italiana (Overseas: A History of Italian Colonial
Expansion, Il Mulino, 2002); Giulietta Stefani, Colonia per maschi (A
Colony for Men, Ombre Corte Editore, 2007); David Forgacs, Italy’s
Margins: Social Exclusion and Nation Formation since 1861 (Cambridge
University Press, 2014); Ruth Ben-Ghiat, Italian Fascism’s Empire Cinema
(Indiana University Press, 2015) and Ennio Flaiano’s novel Tempo di
Uccidere (A Time to Kill, Quartet Books, 1992).
    It is often erroneously believed that colonialism was merely the work of
fascism, when instead it characterized the politics of the Kingdom of Italy
from the start. Its first act, virtually on the heels of Italian unification, was
the acquisition of the Bay of Assab by the Rubattino shipping company in
1869.
    Zoppe’s story covers the temporal arc just before the Walwal incident,
or Abyssinia Crisis (1934), which served as Italy’s casus belli against
Ethiopia. Zoppe’s visions also allude to some subsequent events, such as the
use of poison gas (prohibited by the 1925 Geneva Protocol) during the
Ethiopian War and the retaliation following the failed attempt on Rodolfo
Graziani (1937). After this episode, Addis Ababa was devastated,
soothsayers and storytellers targeted for persecution, accused of having
incited the population to rebel against the Italian colonizers. Other instances
of retaliation include the bloody massacre of the deacons at the monastery
of Debra Libanos.
    My research for Adua involved examining films, photographs,
biographies of more or less famous actresses (like Dorothy Dandridge,
Anna May Wong, Nina Mae McKinney and especially Marilyn Monroe), as
well as studying Italian cinema (especially erotic films from the ’70s - ’80s)
and commercial television from the ’80s - ’90s.
    Meanwhile, Titanic comes from my work with refugees. The migrant
body faces not only racism and suspicion from natives, but increasingly
also distancing (or even open hostility) from the very “community” to
which they belong. In the Adua-Titanic relationship there is this strong
ambiguity.
    For more information, I recommend the pamphlet La negazione del
soggetto migrante (The Negation of the Migrant Subject, Stampa
Alternativa, 2015) by Flore Murard-Yovanovitch.
    On the subject of migrants and refugees, there are numerous books I
could suggest, two of which have been essential for my own education:
Nuruddin Farah’s Yesterday, Tomorrow: Voices from the Somali Diaspora
(Cassell, 2000) and Gloria Anzaldúa’s Borderlands/La Frontera: The New
Mestiza (Aunt Lute Books, 1987).

   One final note; for narrative reasons, I’ve introduced minor
anachronisms. I moved up Maria Uva’s visit to Port Said by a year (it
actually began in 1935) because to me this woman is symbolically
important. Moreover, I have no evidence of the presence of black
interpreters in Rome in 1934, though I do know, from documentary and
family sources, of their presence during the Second Italo-Ethiopian War
(1935 - 36). My grandfather was an interpreter under colonialism, even
working for Rodolfo Graziani. For these reasons, I’ve always wondered
about the translation process, and especially the suffering experienced by
the interpreter who is also a colonial subject. I stuck to the limited and
ephemeral knowledge in my possession as much as I could and the rest
came from my heart and my writing.
                           GLOSSARY

Aabe: father
Abaayo: sister, also a female form of address
Adoon: servant, slave
Afar indhood: four eyes
Aliif, taa, miim, ra, saad, daad, shiin, siin: letters of the Arabic alphabet
Aniga waxaan ahay saaxiibka: I am your friend
Balaayo: nuisance
Bariis iskukaris: rice pilaf with meat
Beer iyo muufo: liver and muufo flatbread
Caano geel: camel milk
Cadar: perfume
Dhuhr: Islamic midday prayer
Duco: prayer, supplication
Faaliyaha: soothsayer
Gaal: infidel, foreigner, white person
Ganbar: stool
Garbasaar: shawl
Garees: woman’s wrap dress
Gorgor: vulture
Gudniinka: infibulation
Guntiino: women’s one-shoulder wrap dress
Hooyo: mother
Injera: bread typical of the Horn of Africa
Jeerer: nappy hair, derogatory term for the Somali Bantu
Jelabiyad: Arab-style men’s tunic
Jidaal: dry season
Karbaash: whip
Labo dhegax: two stones
Macaan: sweet
Maghrib: Islamic sunset prayer
Maktuub: already written
Maskiin: poor (thing)
Munar (munaaradda): lighthouse, watchtower
Oday: old man, elder
Qofkii aammuso waa dhintay: he who is silent dies
Sanbuusi: samosa, pastry filled with meat and onions
Sanjibiil: ginger
Shaah: tea
Shaah cadees: milk tea
Shaash: head scarf
Sharmutta: prostitute
Sheeko sheeko, sheeko xariir: story, story, story of silk (the first line of
many Somali folktales)
Si fiican u tirtir: dry yourself well
Siil: vagina
Tena yistilign: Amharic greeting
Tukul: hut, traditional house with thatched roof
Waan isku xaaray: I shit myself
Wallahi: Arabic oath, affirmation
Xalwo: common confection in the Horn of Africa, halva
Xayaay: help
Xus: celebration
Yaad tahay?: Who are you?
Zab: celebratory feast
             ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I have many people to thank.
    First of all, thank you to Leonardo De Franceschi. He was the person to
ask me to write an afterword for his book L’Africa in Italia. Per una
controstoria postcoloniale del cinema italiano (Africa in Italy: Towards a
Postcolonial Counter-History of Italian Cinema, Aracne, 2013). That
afterword led me to reflect on themes that I would later develop in this
novel. Without that afterword, Adua might not exist. Thank you Leonardo,
from the bottom of my heart.
    The novel also came from another inspiration. One day the Roman
writer Giacometta Limentani showed me one of her childhood photos, of
her as a little girl and three probably Somali askaris in the Prati
neighborhood. It was the first anniversary of the conquest of Ethiopia and
Mussolini put on a big parade on Via dei Fori Imperiali. It was an incredible
photo. I looked at it and my heart filled with contradictory sensations. How
pretty little Giacometta was and how proud those three Somalis on foreign
duty were. I also thought that those four people brought together by chance
shared (even if they didn’t know it at the time) a destiny. Giacometta, a
Jewish girl, and the askaris, subjects of an African colony, would go
through 1938 and its atrocious racial laws. That photo in a certain sense
represented the calm before the storm. This is why I included the Jewish
girl and her parents in the story. The little girl isn’t Giacometta, but she
represents the common destiny of those who suffered under fascism.
    And naturally I want to thank my family for putting up with me. Mama
and Papa, first of all. Two fantastic parents who always support me. I am
lucky to have such wonderful parents. Then my two brothers, Abdul and
Mohamed, my cousins-sisters-more than sisters Zahra and Sofia, Ambra,
Andrea, Mohamed Deq and my sister-in-law, Nura. I’ve been quite busy
and I neglected them a little. But without them this book could not have
come into existence.
    I would also like to thank Rino Bianchi because in some way Adua
grew our of our work on the book Roma negata. Percorsi postcoloniali
nella città (Negated Rome: Postcolonial Routes through the City, Ediesse,
2014). Seeing his photographs motivated me to make Adua into a kind of
symbol.
    I want to thank my actress friends Esther Elisha and Gamey Guilavogui.
Even if they are contemporary actresses, they often have to deal with a star
system anchored in old stereotypes. But they are strong women and they
don’t give in. In a sense, Adua is dedicated to them, women who were able
to make a destiny different than that of this book’s protagonist. Esther and
Gamey are fighters, and if cinema (and theater) changes in Italy it will be
because of people like them.
    I also want to thank Chiara Belliti, who helped me in the work of
editing and taught me to trim the excess. What I learned with her will not
easily be forgotten. I thank Giunti and Benedetta Centovalli for believing in
this project.
    And a big thanks to Shaul Bassi, Ruth Ben-Ghiat and Jama Musse
Jama. This book was itinerant. I wrote it in Rome, but also in other cities,
most importantly Venice (where I was Shaul’s guest), New York (Ruth’s),
and Hargeisa (Jama’s).
    And I’d like to thank, in random order, the many friends who advised
me and listened to me: Daniele Timpano, Elvira Frosini, Erika Manoni,
Maria Cristina Olati, the “libri in testa” group (Elvio Cipollone, Michele
Governatori, Nadia Terranova, Giuseppe Ierolli), Amin Nour, Amir Issa,
Maaza Mengiste, Francesca Melandri, Katia Ippaso, Annalisa Bottani,
Gabriella Kuruvilla, Viviana Gravano, Giulia Grechi, Tahar Lamri,
Piergiorgio Nicolazzini, Tomaso Montanari, Tiziana Giansante, Chiara
Nielsen, Frederika Randall, Clarissa Botsford, Valeria Brigida, the
magazine Internazionale.
    Enormous thanks to my Rome, muse and constant source of inspiration.
    And yes, I’d like to thank Bernini. Without him, Adua wouldn’t have
found a big-eared elephant to tell her story to. Our cultural heritage is also
an affective heritage.
    Anyway, long live elephants!
